SANTIAGO – When the leaders of Mercosur met in Caracas this week, the usual bluster about standing up to imperialism filled the air. But so did the unmistakable scent of decay.
Brazil, the regional powerhouse, always viewed it as a counterweight to the United States in hemispheric affairs. Peronist governments in Argentina used it to hype integration while doing little or nothing to remove actual barriers to trade.
As a Chilean government minister late last decade, I remember the frustration of attending Mercosur gatherings (Chile is an associate member). They were long on posturing and endless speeches, but short on substantive agreements about anything.
And a smattering of smaller countries in Central America and the Caribbean fell into political line in exchange for generous infusions of Venezuelan cash and oil. Back then, Mercosur leaders could claim to offer an “alternative development model” for the region.
The host, Chávez’s successor Nicolás Maduro, confronts a collapsing economy and tensions within his own party. Despite relatively high oil prices, Venezuela has a large fiscal deficit and falling foreign-exchange reserves.
In the face of popular frustration with worsening living conditions, Maduro’s government has relied on violent repression to put an end to street protests. Opposition leader Leopoldo López spent months in a military prison before recently being put on trial.
Argentina’s president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, arrived in Caracas hoping to rouse support in her fight against the so-called vulture funds that bought her country’s sovereign bonds on the cheap and have successfully sued for payment in full. But Fernández found that her colleagues’ polite words of encouragement mattered little.
In an effort to regain access to capital markets, her economic team patched up things with the Paris Club of sovereign creditors and Spain’s Repsol (the former owner of nationalized oil giant YPF); but the fight with the vultures has set the country back. With a presidential election looming in October 2015, most potential candidates (even those from her own party) are quickly distancing themselves from her authoritarian style and troubled economic legacy.
Morales, therefore, served his first term as the head of a different state. When asked why he will run again, he replied – in a peculiar confession for a nationalist leader – that former Queen Sofía of Spain had encouraged him to “finish the job.”
A controversial gag law on the press that was enacted last year has already ended a major newspaper’s print edition. According to Catalina Botero, the outgoing rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, “Ecuador is, along with Cuba, the country that most restricts freedom of expression.”
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff faces a situation that is both similar to and different from that of her Mercosur colleagues. Brazil is not the kind of country where a president can manipulate the constitution or close newspapers at will.
Brazil’s swift recovery from the 2008 financial crisis endeared it to international financial markets; but weak growth since then has left yesterday’s promise unfulfilled. Despite low unemployment, economic anxiety is on the rise – and is beginning to filter to the political realm.
Absent from the Caracas summit was Chile’s president, Michelle Bachelet, who blamed a cold and a busy domestic agenda for her inability to travel. Political complications linked to a possible meeting with the Venezuelan opposition, which Bachelet had chosen not to attend (preferring to send her foreign minister), likely also played a part.
Rousseff and Bachelet were natural candidates to lead the development of a moderate counterweight to the populism of Maduro, Fernández, Morales, and Correa. But Rousseff, like her predecessor, the popular Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, has chosen not to fill that role, instead cozying up to Venezuela.
Uruguay’s president, José Mujica, offered the best summary of what happened in Caracas: “We issued a statement.”
The Third Way\u0027s Second Chance
It is back. The faces and names have changed, but the idea that governments can – and should – combine social-democratic values and modern liberal economics has returned to center stage.
Leaders from Sweden and New Zealand argued that you could make the state both leaner and more effective. And the Third Way could travel well to what was once called the Third World, claimed South Africa’s Thabo Mbeki, Brazil’s Fernando Henrique Cardoso, and Chile’s Ricardo Lagos (I was present as part of Lagos’s delegation.)
Social democrats and their allies lost power in several European countries. The war in Iraq and the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 caused a backlash against some of the policies advocated by Third Way leaders.
He is promising (though not quite yet delivering) deep labor-market and fiscal reforms. After his electoral victory, Renzi received early kudos from Blair himself, who claimed that “Matteo has the dynamism, creativity, and toughness to succeed.”
Manuel Valls, France’s Socialist prime minister, is staking his political capital on an ambitious program of tax and spending cuts that does not enjoy the backing of his party’s traditionalist wing. Critics from the orthodox left accuse him of “taking solutions from Blair and Schröder.”
Renzi and Valls – along with Pedro Sánchez of Spain’s Socialist Party – are part of a broader trend. With the world economy growing slowly, many center-left politicians are trying to mobilize markets and jump-start growth while investing in jobs and skills.
It is not surprising that deeply indebted European governments are casting about for new social policies at a low fiscal cost. But the harsh austerity advocated by Germany’s conservative government is not the same as the gradual adjustment sought by the new generation of Southern social democrats.
Modern social democrats who have read their Keynes understand that some immediate adjustment is necessary to make the program credible. But they also know that additional spending on human capital and physical infrastructure is necessary to limit the impact of fiscal retrenchment on employment and wages and to strengthen the economy’s growth potential.
Schröder’s reshaping of Germany’s labor market in the early 2000s was hugely controversial at the time; but, in retrospect, it turned Germany from the sick man of Europe into the continent’s export powerhouse. The Nordic countries have led the way in experimenting with new ways to deliver public services while adopting “flexicurity” in labor relations.
The effectiveness of these ideas is not limited to the rich countries of the North. The governments of the Concertación in Chile, Alan García in Peru, and Fernando Henrique Cardoso in Brazil all derived inspiration from the Blair-Clinton-Schröder agenda.
But it is remarkable in the case of socialist Marina Silva, who is calling for new trade pacts beyond Mercosur and for making the Central Bank of Brazil independent. Blair, who gave the Bank of England its full independence during his first week in office, would be proud.
What matters is what works, not what is ideologically pure. Instead of the sterile and endless debate as to whether the state should be big or small, it is more fruitful to ask what kind of state intervention, and where.
The second idea is fiscal realism. Budgetary prudence is both desirable (unsustainable deficits owe their name to the fact that they cannot be sustained) and progressive (when things blow up, it is the poor and the vulnerable who suffer the most).
The state can and should redistribute income and wealth, but in doing so it should not weaken incentives to work and to save. Instead of simply providing handouts, governments should strive to guarantee good jobs at good wages.
If the rules are designed properly, a society in which people decide and act freely can also be a society in which opportunities are fairly distributed. And conversely, without minimum opportunity for all, liberty is more illusory than real.
These four ideas animate a Third Way that is now enjoying a second chance – though it should have been the first choice all along.
The Lawless Sea
