MEXICO CITY – For the next American president, fixing the international mess inherited from the Bush administration will be no simple task. While Latin America will not be a priority for either an Obama or McCain administration, continuing the United States’ neglect of the last seven years is no longer viable.
Two distinct political/diplomatic challenges stand out: Cuba’s imminent transition or succession crisis, and the continuing ascent of the region’s “two lefts,” one represented by Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez and the other by Brazil’s increasingly influential President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. The next US administration will only prove successful if it grasps that Latin America is living through a moment that combines the best and worst aspects of its history: the fastest economic growth since the 1970’s, with poverty and inequality diminishing, and more democratic and respectful of human rights than ever before, but becoming more politically polarized.
Demanding a full-fledged democratic transition as a pre-condition for normalizing US-Cuban relations is both unrealistic and unpalatable to Latin America. Yet the US cannot set aside the question of democracy and human rights in Cuba while it awaits the departure of Fidel’s brother, Raúl.
But the US should not succumb to this temptation. The US, Canada, Europe, and Latin America have constructed a regional legal framework, which must not be abandoned, to defend democratic rule and human rights in the hemisphere.
Elections must instead be part of a comprehensive process of normalization: they should neither be a deal-breaker nor a non-issue. While the US should lift its trade embargo as soon as Cuba’s transition begins, everything else should be conditional on Cuba initiating a process of resolving all outstanding issues.
In fact, there are two lefts in the region: a modern, democratic, globalized and market-friendly left, found in Chile, Brazil, Uruguay, parts of Central America, and, up to a point, in Peru; and a retrograde, populist, authoritarian, statist, and anti-American left, found in Mexico, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Cuba, Ecuador, Bolivia, Venezuela, and, to a lesser extent, in Argentina, Colombia, and Paraguay. Some of these “lefts” are in power; some, as in Mexico in its last, disputed presidential election, barely missed conquering it, but may still do so.
Over the past two years, it has become increasingly evident that the “modern” or “soft” left is, all in all, governing well. The other left has proved to be more extreme and erratic than many anticipated.
The retrograde left today can realize Che Guevara’s old dream: not “one, two, many Vietnams,” but “one, two, many Venezuelas,” winning power by the ballot and then conserving and concentrating it through constitutional changes and the creation of armed militias and monolithic parties. It can finance all of this with the support of Venezuela’s state oil company, implementing social policies that are misguided over the long term but seductive in the short run, especially when carried out by Cuban doctors, teachers, and instructors.
Herein lies a dilemma for the next US president: how to address the clear rift between the two lefts in a way that improves US-Latin American relations, fortifies the modern left, and weakens the retrograde left without resorting to the failed interventionist policies of the past. The best, strictly Latin America-focused steps, are self-evident, if not easily achievable.
Aside from areas of particular concern (oil, arms, guerrillas, drugs), the US needs Latin America dearly nowadays because resistance to it is springing up everywhere, and with greater virulence than at any time since World War II’s end. The next US president must reinvigorate a relationship that is ready to be substantially transformed for the first time since Franklin Roosevelt’s Good Neighbor Policy of seven decades ago.
A New Year\u0027s Resolution
When the millennium opened, world leaders pledged to seek peace, the end of poverty, and a cleaner environment. Since then, the world has seen countless acts of violence, terrorism, famine, and environmental degradation.
Knowledge, scientific advance, travel, and global communications give us many opportunities to find solutions for the world's great problems. When a new disease called SARS hit China last year, the World Health Organization coordinated the actions of dozens of governments, and the crisis was quickly brought under control, at least for now.
When Bill Gates donated $1 billion to bring vaccines to poor children, he made it possible to protect tens of millions of young people from preventable diseases. When an agricultural research unit called the World Agroforestry Center discovered that a certain tree could help African farmers grow more food, they introduced a new and valuable approach to overcoming Africa's chronic food crisis.
Unfortunately, such examples of international cooperation are as rare as they are impressive. With our knowledge, science, and technology, the horrendous living conditions of the world's poorest people could be dramatically improved.
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan has honored me by making me his Special Adviser on the Millennium Development Goals and asking me to lead a group of scholars and development experts in identifying practical steps to reach the goals by the target date in 2015. This effort, known as the UN Millennium Project, will issue its report to Secretary-General Annan on January 17, 2005.
Yet they require global partnership between the rich and poor countries of the world. Most importantly, the world's richest countries need to do much more to help the poorest countries make use of modern science and technology to solve these great problems.
The US, for example, currently spends around $450 billion each year on its military, but less than $15 billion to help the world's poorest countries fight disease, educate their children, and protect the environment. This is a mistake, because military approaches alone cannot make America safe.
Germany, Japan, and several other rich countries are also doing much less than they should - and much less than they promised the poor countries that they would do. In 2002, all donor countries committed to "make concrete efforts" to reach 0.7% of national income in development aid to poor countries.
The year 2005 will offer many opportunities for citizens around the world to insist that their leaders keep their Millennium promises. After our report is issued in January, Secretary-General Kofi Annan will issue a report to the world in the spring, identifying the practical steps that should be taken this year.
Blair has promised that he will make the fight against poverty and long-term climate change the two priorities of the summit. In September, the world's leaders will reconvene at the UN to decide on their actions during the coming decade.
Germany and Japan say that they want a permanent seat on the UN Security Council, but neither has yet followed through on its own pledges to help the world's poorest people. The world's poorest countries will ask themselves why they should vote for Germany and Japan to have permanent seats on the Security Council if they can't keep their promises.
2005 is the year that words can become reality, and that the world can begin to fulfill its hopes for our new millennium. Let us make our leaders aware that we aspire to shared peace and prosperity.
In Defense of Angela Merkel
