PARIS – The recent cover of Der Spiegel showing German Chancellor Angela Merkel in front of the Acropolis surrounded by Nazi officers serves an important purpose: it finally poses, in a way that cannot be evaded, the question of Germanophobia in Europe.
Demonstrations in Cyprus in March 2013 included banners bearing caricatures of Merkel done up as Adolf Hitler. In Valencia at around the same time, on the occasion of the annual Fallas celebration, there was Merkel as an evil headmistress delivering to the head of the Spanish government and his ministers “The Ten Commandments of Angela the Exterminator.”
Two months later, in Portugal, similar parades featured the same Hitlerized Merkel caricatures, borne by howling demonstrators dressed in mourning clothes and decrying the German leader’s “policy of massacring the poor.”
And, naturally, there was Greece, where the phenomenon reached its apogee during the near-riots of October 2012, in which the world was treated to the spectacle of Nazi and German flags flown together – and then burned – together before the Acropolis in scenes that presaged the Der Spiegel cover.
In Italy, the right-wing daily newspaper Il Giornale had no scruples about devoting its headline for August 3, 2012, to the emergence of the “Fourth Reich.” Likewise, conspiracy websites in the countries of northern Europe claim that Germany’s eagerness to support Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko against Russian President Vladimir Putin is a reenactment of Hitler’s subjugation of Ukraine.
From the extreme right, National Front leader Marine Le Pen chides Merkel for the “suffering” that she is imposing on the peoples of Europe. From the opposite extreme, we have the Left Party’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon thundering against Merkel’s “austerity” policy and inviting her to “shut up.”
The problem with this Germanophobia is not simply that it is stupid, or that it is yet another symptom of the decomposition, before our eyes, of the noble European project of integration and ever-closer union.
No, the problem with today’s Germanophobia is that, contrary to what the sorcerer’s apprentices who stoke it would have us believe, their behavior is not a sign of their opposition to the true fascism that lies on the horizon, but rather of their allegiance – and even contribution – to it. Why?
For starters, to oppose Germany’s social, economic, and foreign policies by equating Merkel with Hitler is to banalize Hitler. However legitimate disagreement with those policies may be, Germany is one of the continent’s most scrupulous and exemplary democracies.
What is more (and this is key), those keenest to discredit Merkel just happen to be the same people who do not hesitate to waltz with Viennese neo-Nazis or to form an alliance, as in Athens, with the leaders of a genuinely extremist party. All of the clamor raised around a Germany that has supposedly “reunited with its demons” masks the voice of fascistic parties – from Greece’s Golden Dawn to Hungary’s Jobbik, Slovakia’s SNS, Belgium’s Vlaams Belang, and Bulgaria’s Ataka – that are in the process of establishing themselves in Europe.
It should also be noted that Merkel is a woman, and that hatred for women – the disdain in which they, right alongside the Jews, were regarded by the racist theoreticians of the 1920s and 1930s – has been an essential dimension of every expression of fascism. Likewise, the slogans slung about in Valencia in October 2012 – with demonstrators urged to chant at the chancellor’s effigy, “You will love money above all else” and “You will honor the banks and the Bank” – had the unmistakably foul odor of the old mantras about “the golden calf” and the “cosmopolitan plutocracy.”
People have finally come to understand that anti-Americanism, born on the extreme right and fed, in Germany, for example, by the philosophy of Martin Heidegger and his acolytes, is a fixture of fascism.
It triumphed with Charles Maurras’ Action Française and its protracted war with “Jewish and Germanic abstractions.” And it culminated with the red-brown cells that, even today, on sites that I prefer not to mention, offer “grub” and a “hideout” for persons willing to “bump off” the “bosses” on the chancellor’s “payroll.”
The history of ideas has its logic, reason, and folly, its unconscious and its trajectory. It is both futile and dangerous to deny any of them.
That is why, today, it is critically important, in the face of a dark force that is rising, swelling, and unfurling in Europe, to defend Angela Merkel.
Angela Merkel Meets the World
At long last, Angela Merkel is Germany’s new – and first woman – Chancellor. Although continuity will remain the hallmark of foreign policy, Germany’s international engagement under Merkel will sound and feel different from that under Gerhard Schroeder’s leadership.
Schroeder came to power seven years ago representing a new generation whose formative experience was not the Cold War, European integration, and transatlantic friendship, but German unification and the restoration of national sovereignty. For him and the team that took over after Helmut Kohl’s 16-year reign, Germany had become a normal country, no different from other European heavyweights like France or Britain.
Indeed, one of Schroeder’s first major foreign-policy experiences was the EU summit of 1999, where the leaders of France and Britain played rough with the newcomer from Berlin. The lesson that Schroeder drew was to insist that Germany could no longer be taken for granted and would demand a role commensurate to its size and weight.
Thus, when Schroeder claimed special circumstances for Germany’s failure to meet the budgetary ceilings of the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact, he seemed to be arguing that the restrictions should apply only to smaller countries, not to the big players. When he rightly opposed America’s war against Iraq, the pride of standing up to the world's only superpower was palpable.
In fairness, it should be acknowledged that it was under Schroeder that Germany shed hesitations to deploy soldiers abroad. His support for international crisis missions in Kosovo, Bosnia, or Afghanistan required considerable political courage and made Germany one of the major contributors to international stability efforts.
But that alienation already largely ended earlier this year, when the Bush administration realized that allies are good to have and that Germany is an important one. Merkel will reintroduce the warmth that has been missing under Schroeder, but she will not become America’s yes-woman.
Nor will she abandon special relations with Russia, to which every German chancellor since Adenauer has attached major importance. But she has already made clear that Germany’s neighbors to the East will have no reason not feel bypassed.
She will continue to emphasize close relations with France because there is no alternative; Britain, absent from the euro zone and the Schengen border regime, remains the odd man-in of the EU.
But there will be no new initiatives on integration until leaders in the countries that rejected the Constitutional Treaty are ready for a new try. Then Merkel will be in a key position to add weight to a new effort for moving the EU forward.
In fact, there is very little Merkel has to do after her election to make her mark on foreign policy; the visible change of style will suffice, at least at first. In any case, she will have her hands full pushing through the economic reforms for which she will be elected and which are her top priority.
Abroad, Merkel has no need to demonstrate that Germany is a big country in Europe; her partners are fully aware of this. But it is also more than just a normal country: Germany remains central to holding together the two international institutions that will continue to assure its well-being, the European Union and the Atlantic alliance.
Angela Merkel’s Vision Thing
