LAHORE – In 2005, during a visit to Islamabad, I met Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf and told him of a conversation I had had with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India. The Indian leader, whom I have known for years, had said that he wanted better relations with Pakistan as one his legacies.
“I have invited Manmohan a half-dozen times to visit Pakistan. I have also offered to take him to his village near Chakwal, a few miles south of Islamabad, where he was born.
I repeated the conversation to Singh, who explained that in a democracy such as India, a great deal of work needs to be done with the members of the coalition and the senior bureaucracy before the prime minister can travel to Pakistan. “Musharraf is a military leader; he needs only to pack his bags and head this way.”
Musharraf did head that way a few months later, when he forced an invitation out of Singh to watch a cricket match between the two sides in New Delhi in 2005. It took the Indian government some time to formulate an answer to Musharraf’s request for a visit.
“How nice it would be to conduct our affairs in this august House with the same spirit of sportsmanship that our cricketers exhibit on the playing fields of the sub-continent,” he said. “I am happy to inform the honorable members of this House that I have decided to invite President Musharraf to come to India to watch the cricket match between our two teams.
He and Singh also found time during the game to talk about bilateral relations, and agreed to launch what came to be called the “composite dialogue,” covering eight contentious issues that had soured ties for so long. Three years later, a Pakistan-based terrorist group killed more than 160 people in Mumbai, India’s financial capital – and, with them, the diplomatic opening initiated by cricket.
Once again, however, cricket has revived dialogue between the sub-continent’s two nuclear-armed rivals. This time, the initiative came from Singh, who invited his Pakistani counterpart, Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani, to visit Mohali, near New Delhi, to watch the two countries play the semi-final in the Cricket World Cup.
Of the troika that currently governs Pakistan – the president, the prime minister, and the chief of staff of the army – it is the prime minister who carries the least amount of authority. It was Gilani who sat next to Singh to watch the game; but, ultimately, process, rather than protocol, will determine how bilateral relations move forward.
We should put our ancient animosities behind us to attend to the problems our two nations face.” Gilani expressed the same sentiment: “We need to focus on dealing with our common enemies – inflation, poverty, hunger, disease, and unemployment – for the prosperity of the two countries.”
Senior officials from the ministries of commerce, defense, and foreign affairs will meet in the next two months followed by a meeting of the foreign ministers. Gilani invited Singh to visit Pakistan, an invitation that “will be considered carefully,” according to Indian Foreign Secretary Nirupama Rao.
We have been here before, of course, only to see prospects for improved India-Pakistan relations snuffed out. There are no guarantees that this time will be different.
An Inequality Tax
The economic booms in China and India have helped to reduce global inequality. Over the two last decades, masses of Indians and Chinese have closed the gap (in relative terms) with the rich world.
But, at the same time, many of the world’s truly poor countries have fallen further behind (particularly in Africa, where developments are often described as catastrophic), and inequality within most countries has risen. Widening inequality has been recorded in the United States (starting with Ronald Reagan’s administration), the United Kingdom (starting with Margaret Thatcher), Russia during its privatization, and more recently in China and India.
These developments seem to add to global inequality. So, on balance, it seems that global inequality has been relatively stable during the last two decades.
They argue that only poverty reduction matters. In the words of Anne Krueger, the Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, “Poor people are desperate to improve their material conditions…rather than to march up the income distribution [ladder].”
Thus, even if the absolute income gap between an average American and an average African increases, why worry? After all, such people argue, the average African would be a bit less poor.
But this assumes that our income relative to the income of others does not matter. On the contrary, psychological studies invariably show that people care not only about their absolute income, but also about where they stand in the social pyramid and whether their position is fair.
In the past, a poor African might have looked at his compatriots and resented their wealth; now, both he and his better-off compatriots look at the rich world and resent the huge income gaps they see. The gaps are most obvious where people from different countries work together, as in many multinational companies.
But even when people do not work together, globalization, by bringing the world to everyone’s living room (or hut), enables them to make much wider comparisons of their living standards. It erodes the relative security in which the rich world could shelter itself, as in a cocoon.
This is why international action to address both global poverty and global inequality is needed. Global redistribution through taxes that would be levied by an international body may seem far-fetched today, but the logic of development that we are witnessing – particularly the move away from nation-states as the locus of sovereignty – suggests that it may eventually come to pass.
But it should have been disbursed directly in cash to the most needy Russians: pensioners whose earnings plummeted due to inflation and economic contraction. An international organization could have simply used the existing infrastructure of the Russian state to distribute cash grants to some 20 million pensioners – money that would have been much better targeted and spent than by giving the same amount to the government.
If this had been done, Russians would have fondly remembered receiving cash aid from the international community rather than blaming it for transferring funds to corrupt leaders. But the same or a similar approach could be taken in many countries today, from Angola to Zimbabwe.
The approach is simple and powerful. It involves three steps: raise money from the globally rich, do not deal with governments, and transfers funds in cash to the poor.
Those who advocate leaving globalization exclusively in the hands of the private sector may resent the idea of vesting tax-raising authority in a global agency. But they cannot fail to notice that the processes they support undercut their own position by rendering the wealth gap more obvious and the fairness of the actual global distribution more questionable.
An Inflation Reality Check
