CAMBRIDGE – As inflation continues to soar everywhere, maybe the world’s central bankers need a jolt to awaken them from complacency. How about holding one of their bi-monthly meetings in hyperinflationary Zimbabwe?
According to Zimbabwe’s official statistical agency, inflation topped 66,000% in 2007, which looks more like Weimar Germany than modern-day Africa. While no one is quite certain how the government managed to estimate prices, given that there is virtually nothing for sale in the shops, most indicators suggest that Zimbabwe does have a good shot at breaking world records for inflation.
Of course, curious as they might be, central bankers could decide that meeting in Harare would be too inconvenient and politically unpalatable. Fortunately, there are lots of other nice – albeit less spectacular – inflation destinations.
Chinese authorities are so worried by their country’s 7% inflation they are copying India and imposing price controls on food. Even the United States had inflation at 4% last year, though the Federal Reserve is somehow convinced that most people won’t notice.
But if central bankers think that today’s inflation is simply the product of short-term resource scarcities as opposed to lax monetary policy, they are mistaken. The fact is that around most of the world, inflation – and eventually inflation expectations – will keep climbing unless central banks start tightening their monetary policies.
Faced with a vicious combination of collapsing housing prices and imploding credit markets, the Fed has been aggressively cutting interest rates to try to stave off a recession. But even if the Fed does not admit it in its forecasts, the price of this “insurance policy” will almost certainly be higher inflation down the road, and perhaps for several years.
Others, such as Russia and Argentina, do not literally peg to the dollar but nevertheless try to smooth movements. As a result, whenever the Fed cuts interest rates, it puts pressure on the whole “dollar bloc” to follow suit, lest their currencies appreciate as investors seek higher yields.
Looser US monetary policy has thus set the tempo for inflation in a significant chunk – perhaps as much as 60% – of the global economy. But, with most economies in the Middle East and Asia in much stronger shape than the US and inflation already climbing sharply in most emerging-market countries, aggressive monetary stimulus is the last thing they need right now.
The European Central Bank is staying calm for the moment, but it, too, is probably holding back on interest-rate hikes partly out of fear of driving the euro, already at record levels, even higher. And the ECB worries that if the US recession proves contagious, it may have to turn around and start slashing rates anyway.
If the US tips from mild recession into deep recession, the global deflationary implications will cancel out some of the inflationary pressures the world is facing. Global commodity prices will collapse, and prices for many goods and services will stop rising so quickly as unemployment and excess capacity grow.
Of course, a US recession will also bring further Fed interest-rate cuts, which will exacerbate problems later. But inflation pressures will be even worse if the US recession remains mild and global growth remains solid.
Until now, most investors have thought that they would rather risk high inflation for a couple of years than accept even a short and shallow recession. But they too easily forget the costs of high inflation, and how difficult it is to squeeze it out of the system.
An Intelligent War on Terror
Terrorism is an existential threat. In our European Security Strategy, it was deemed one of the key strategic threats facing the European Union, and to fight it we are using all instruments at our disposal, particularly in the intelligence area.
This is the kind of operational intelligence that is best done at the national level. Many arrests and disruptions of terrorist operations in Europe result from cooperation between EU members' intelligence services.
I was recently asked by journalists whether inter-agency cooperation is sufficient and whether European mechanisms for sharing operational intelligence should be created. Later that very day, a joint operation resulted in simultaneous arrests in five European countries.
Europe's security services are working closely together within the Counter-Terrorist Group, and Europol's Counter-Terrorist Task Force has been re-established. A high-level group on border and transport security is at work, and links between member states' police chiefs are strengthening.
Member states also need intelligence derived from ongoing casework, not to inform policy, at least not directly, but to disrupt and dismantle networks and prevent attacks. This information is in many ways more sensitive, and services share it on a "need to know" basis, not for the sake of promoting cooperation.
Intelligence services can educate the public, explaining the origins of the alienation that underpins terrorism, how radicalization and recruitment occur, and highlight terrorists' goals, methods, and targeting strategies. Only when we understand this can we develop appropriate and concrete policies.
The EU's members have structures to provide this, and with their support and input we are building structures at a Europe-wide level, to bring this information to EU policymakers. Europol is performing a similar function with material derived from police work, and we are working to ensure synergy between these two efforts.
In the aftermath of the Madrid bombings, the EU focused on internal aspects of the fight against terrorism. But this does not mean that the Union has become introverted.
Generally, counter-terrorism is very high on our international agenda and is becoming better integrated into the Union's political dialogue with other countries. We are better targeting our external assistance and capacity building programs, and we are ready to use our trade and economic muscle, when necessary, by demanding counter-terrorism clauses in bilateral treaties.
There has also been a sea change in transatlantic cooperation between the EU and the US. Deeds speak louder than words, and deeds on the transatlantic level have been swift and decisive - for example, joint efforts aimed at choking off terrorist financing - even when we had strong divergences over Iraq.
To facilitate the extremely complex task of counter-terrorism policymaking in the EU, we now have a Plan of Action, approved by the European Council, which clearly specifies who does what, and by when. This will also help national parliaments understand EU objectives and facilitate their legislative planning.
We also have a considerable number of new instruments in the area of justice and home affairs. The European Arrest Warrant is already producing concrete results, and we are moving towards the "free movement of judicial decisions" in the EU, through which judicial decisions - such as arrest and surrender of suspects, confiscation, and freezing of assets - will be mutually recognized.
As requested by the European Council, I am developing, in cooperation with the European Commission, a strategy to shut down terrorist financing. This is where the real test of cooperation lies, for our success will rely on securing the appropriate interaction and flow of intelligence between the relevant services and the financial and banking communities.
Judicial, police, and intelligence cooperation should be the focal point for action. This does not mean that we are not working on how European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) can offer a meaningful contribution.
Aside from security and intelligence efforts, we must also work to deny "oxygen" to the terrorists. This means addressing the factors that contribute to support for and recruitment by terrorist groups.
The EU will be tough on terrorism. But it must also be tough on the causes of terrorism.
Argentina’s Sovereign Bondage
