WASHINGTON, DC – Syria’s civil war has become a wretchedly complicated problem. As the parties prepare to meet in Geneva for the second round of United Nations-sponsored peace talks, the government has launched vicious barrel-bomb attacks on Aleppo and other cities; more moderate Islamist rebel groups, including the Free Syrian Army, are openly at war with Al Qaeda affiliates; and Al Qaeda-linked groups are now fighting among themselves.
US and European citizens are streaming into Syria to take up jihad; and there is a growing consensus that the post-World War I Middle East boundaries are coming undone. Indeed, the viability of Syria, a multi-ethnic state, is being threatened by multiple armed groups supported by external sponsors – Iran, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Russia, the United States, Turkey, France, and many private donors – who themselves have conflicting aims.
Here are three ways to simplify the equation and maximize the chances that the parties to the Geneva II peace conference will be able to agree on more than the desirability of someday holding a Geneva III.
In the run-up to Geneva II, each party has sought to strengthen its hand at the negotiating table by killing as many adversaries and holding or regaining as much ground as possible. The task now for would-be peace brokers is to halt that dynamic by agreeing on criteria for participation in whatever elections will eventually be held, regardless of whether President Bashar al-Assad remains in power until then.
Here the UN must reaffirm its “responsibility to protect” doctrine, not as a justification for military intervention, but as a fundamental principle agreed by all countries: governments must protect their citizens. If Assad’s Ba’ath party cannot uphold that responsibility, it forfeits its own legitimacy as a participant in any future government.
But now the conflict has spread across the Middle East, destabilizing Lebanon and Jordan and threatening to fracture Iraq. The UN Security Council is charged with addressing breaches or threats to international peace, a criterion that is now clearly met.
As a permanent member of the Security Council, Russia thus has an obligation to act; it (and China) can no longer hide behind the argument that the UN should not be engaged in Syria’s internal affairs. At a time when the Winter Olympic Games in Sochi put Russia squarely on the international stage, the US and other Security Council members should plan a series of resolutions that confront the Kremlin with the choice of meeting its responsibility or applying its own leverage to bring the conflict to an end.
Finally, the single most important step that US President Barack Obama could take is to put the credible threat of force back on the table. In three years of increasingly bloody conflict, the only diplomatic success was achieved when Assad believed that he faced US missile strikes.
But most experts believe that military force is off the table. The US public sharply rejected Obama’s planned missile strikes to punish Assad for the repeated use of chemical weapons, and a recent Pew poll indicates that a majority of Americans believe that the US “should mind its own business internationally and let other countries get along the best they can on their own.”
The US has withdrawn from Afghanistan and Iraq, but the gains so painfully won are being reversed. Al Qaeda is back and is fighting for its own proto-state in western Iraq and eastern Syria, which is far closer to Europe and the US than the caves of Afghanistan.
If Al Qaeda operatives begin threatening the US from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, the US will just take them out with drones, as it has done in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Yemen. But if he is willing to contemplate using force against Al Qaeda without international authorization in the future, why not use drones now to strengthen the moderate Syrian opposition and force Assad into serious negotiations?
The threat of cruise-missile strikes last September was enough to send Al Qaeda members in Syria scrambling for the hills. A strike designed to destroy Assad’s air force and prevent him from dropping bombs full of nails on his people would concentrate his mind on a diplomatic solution.
Obama should announce that the US is committed to a political solution in Syria, and that his government will do whatever it can to bring about such a solution through next week’s peace conference and follow-up action. But if a ceasefire has not been achieved in the next three months, the US should work with regional organizations and all friends of the Syrian people to authorize a set of military strikes on Al Qaeda-linked forces and on the killing machine that Assad’s government has aimed at civilians.
The Obama administration should make the case for this to the American people in terms of straightforward US security interests. After all, if Geneva II fails, Geneva III will not be about Syria alone.
World Cup America
Many millions more Americans watched the World Cup soccer tournament in English and Spanish than ever before. True, with the World Cup’s end, many are arguing, as usual, that Americans pay attention only every four years – and only when the US is playing.
Indeed, on a weekday afternoon in the middle of summer, nearly 15 million Americans tuned in to the Brazil-Germany match in the semifinal. That is more than the usual viewership for ESPN’s Monday Night Football, the biggest regular television draw for fans of American football.
My apartment mate explained that everyone in her office, in the US Department of Education, had used the excuse of a birthday party to watch the US-Germany match. On the Tuesday afternoon when the US played Belgium in the knockout round, every bar in Aspen, Colorado, was packed.
But US television showed an enormous crowd of fans in Kansas City following the US-Belgium match on a large outdoor screen. It was not quite the equivalent of the final match between Italy and France in 2006, when virtually every small Italian town turned out to watch on the main square; but Americans all over the country spent the month ducking out of work and into sports bars.
America’s growing embrace of soccer reflects some important ways in which the US has “joined” the world. For starters, both the US team and the US audience for soccer derive their growing strength from immigrants – many from countries where the sport is a national passion.
When my driver was Ethiopian, as often happened, we would commiserate over the national team’s defeat by Nigeria in a qualifying round, then celebrate the US defeat of Ghana, and end by agreeing that in four years, or certainly in eight, the US team would be among the world’s best. In almost every case, my driver would tell me that his children were playing in local youth leagues.
These immigrants are not only providing homegrown soccer talent for US teams; they are a core part of the expanding US audience for soccer worldwide. Dan Levy, lead writer for the US sports website The Bleacher Report, points out that most commentators define “American soccer” as the number of Americans who watch American players in US league play.
US tennis fans watch tennis wherever it is played all over the world, and the US audience for golf does not plummet when a tournament is played in the sport’s birthplace, Scotland. More Americans watch soccer in the European and Mexican leagues, in English and in Spanish, than watch baseball and ice hockey, traditionally considered two of the “big four” US sports (along with American football and basketball).
I still have an uncle, aunt, and cousins in Brussels. During the US-Belgium match, emails flew fast and thick across the family network, with lots of friendly rivalry.
My mother claimed divided loyalty, because Belgium, after all, was “the David against the mighty Goliath.” Her three American children all weighed in simultaneously, pointing out that in soccer it is the US that is the underdog.
At a bar in Aspen, where the only open seat was at a table with an older man and his son-in-law (who welcomed me and offered to put my beer on their tab), we cheered and groaned whenever the US got close to scoring a goal or missed a kick. In the periodic short breaks, we sounded each other out enough to find out that we were definitely in opposing political camps.
Given the current state of polarization in US politics, I think it is likely that in most other settings, my tablemates would not willingly have bought several rounds of beer for someone who spent two years working at the State Department for Hillary Clinton. Here, though, we were cheering not for our political side, but for our national side.
But the Olympics is a smorgasbord of sports, each with its core of devotees, who often cheer on their favorites at the same time, but separately, in different arenas. And, more often than not, what we are witnessing is individual achievement – the deeply concentrated agility and courage of the downhill racer or the finely disciplined movements of the gymnast – rather than true team effort.
The World Cup allows all of the supporters of one country to come together at one moment for one game between two groups that must, like them, become more than the sum of their parts. It actually feels incomplete to watch the World Cup alone.
US exceptionalism remains alive and well, of course. I suspect that we will always call the world’s game “soccer.”
The Shareholder Spring Continues
