NEW YORK – In a way, the stir aroused by the decision by the International Criminal Court (ICC) to indict Sudan’s President Omar al-Bashir for war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur is a surprise. After all, the Court has no means of its own to arrest anyone in Sudan, much less a head of state who commands the country’s armed forces.
Despite the ICC’s seeming powerlessness, many governments’ leaders are engaged in strenuous efforts to block the indictment. They do not seem concerned that the charges are unfair; rather, they appear to be demonstrating solidarity with a fellow head of state.
Those denouncing the attempt to put Bashir on trial include the large blocs of countries that are members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the African Union, together with such powerful states as China and Russia. One can only guess whether some of those joining this effort are motivated by concern that they themselves may some day face charges like those leveled at Bashir by the ICC judges.
Though Bashir may be able to avoid arrest simply by limiting his international travel, the commotion provoked by the indictment is not irrational. The charges against him have a powerful stigmatizing effect.
The fact that a panel of judges representing the 108 governments that are parties to the ICC has accused Bashir of principal responsibility for the crimes committed in Darfur during the past six years undermines the legitimacy of his continued rule. Those crimes have caused more than 300,000 deaths, and have forcibly displaced at least another 2.7 million people.
He had to flee Liberia a few months later and initially received asylum in Nigeria, but is now on trial in The Hague. When those indictments were issued, no one could have predicted how events would unfold; in retrospect, it is evident that the indictments’ delegitimizing effects had important consequences.
Of course, the ICC’s prosecutor and judges are themselves taking a substantial risk in the indictment of Bashir. The Court is still in its infancy, and antagonizing the many government leaders expressing solidarity with him could jeopardize its future.
And the Security Council referred the Darfur case to the Court in 2005. This was an investigation that had to be conducted, and those found to have the highest level of responsibility for the crimes had to be indicted.
Many of those now objecting to the prosecution of Bashir participated in the decisions leading to the indictment. If the ICC’s indictment now causes them discomfort, that is only because they did not anticipate that the Court would carry out the responsibilities that they themselves assigned to it.
A Primer for Pandemics
In 2003, it was SARS. Today, it is a potential avian virus similar to the one that killed 30 million people after 1914.
Bacteria, prions, parasites, and even environmental factors could suddenly change in a way that slays us. It is widely predicted that when this happens, the economic and human losses will exceed that of any previous war.
Indeed, it is humbling to remember that some of history’s most deadly invasions were carried out by single-cell organisms, such as cholera, bubonic plague, and tuberculosis. Countries with the resources to do so are making resistance plans against pandemics – limited strategies that would protect their own citizens.
The virus is shaped so that it can drill into a particular feature of that cell and inject parts of itself inside, confusing the cell into making more viruses and destroying itself in the process. With their very specific forms, the most effective anti-viral vaccines must be designed for a narrow range of factors.
For example, they usually find it difficult to jump between species, because they would have to change their structure. But if large numbers of a host – say, birds – encounter a great number of people, eventually the virus will find a way to prosper in a new type of cell.
Deadly mutations of any kind need to be identified urgently, so that an effective vaccine can be designed before the strain becomes comfortable in the human body. Unfortunately our present methods of detection are not sensitive enough.
They evolve and adapt easily, which means that they learn to sidestep our drugs over time. Bacteria should be checked for two types of mutation: adaptation by a hostile form that enables it to become super-immune to drugs, or a deadly mutant strain that appears in one of the multitude of “safe” bacteria.
They are made from proteins similar to those that the body uses during healthy operations, which means that they are able to fool the body’s tools into making more prions. They have only recently been recognized as the cause of several infectious diseases, including mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, which kill by crowding out healthy brain cells.
Malaria afflicts 300 million people and is the world’s biggest killer of children. Many parasites are worms: hookworm (800 million people infected), roundworm (1.5 billion), schistosomes (200 million), and the worm that causes Elephantiasis (150 million).
Environmental chemicals and particulates might warrant their own categories. Or consider combinations of problems, such as these chemical infectors mixing with airborne pollens, and apparently pushing up incidences of asthma.
The bottom line is that we can’t predict where the threat will emerge, so we need a distributed, intelligent detection system. In practical terms, how should it be built?
They would be located everywhere, with an emphasis on vulnerable regions. Initial warning signs of a pandemic are most likely to appear in the developing world, but detection nodes should be positioned in every country, with the least possible expense.
Medical centers and clinics would be expected to investigate the cause of ailments in a large number of their patients, even in cases where the symptoms seem common. A small amount of additional scientific expertise and lab equipment would need to be added to a public health system that serves ordinary needs.
First, illness is more likely to be reported in a city hospital than at a specialist institute. Second, the investment would boost latent public health in that region.
Rich countries could justify the expense in terms of the savings that would result from early detection of a major threat. Tropical climates and urban slums are humanity’s front line against pandemics, and they should be equipped properly.
Public health is an important asset for any nation. With so much at stake, it makes sense to place sentinels near every swamp, city, public market, and farmyard on earth.
A Prisoner’s Christmas
