LUKYANIVSKA PRISON, KYIV – It has been said that there are no atheists in a foxhole. Here, after my show trial and four and a half months in a cell, I have discovered that there are no atheists in prison, either.
When, despite unbearable pain, you are interrogated – including in your cell – for dozens of hours without a break, and an authoritarian regime’s entire system of coercion, including its media, is trying to discredit and destroy you once and for all, prayer becomes the only intimate, trusting, and reassuring conversation that one can have. God, one realizes, is one’s only friend and only available family, because – deprived even of access to a trusted priest – there is no one else in whom to confide one’s worries and hopes.
In this season of love and family, the loneliness of a prison cell is almost unbearable. The gray, dead silence of night (guards peer in voyeuristically through a slot in the door), the sudden, disembodied shrieks of prisoners, shrieks of distress and rage, the distant rattles and clangs of prison bolts: all make sleep impossible, or so restless as to be a torment.
On the contrary, they are ignited by it: your mind is set free from mundane concerns to ponder the inestimable and your place within it – a freedom of spirit that is a truly unexpected gift this Christmas season. In the cell’s darkness, I gather strength and hope from the fact that God somehow seems so near to me here.
Indeed, I have recently been reading Dietrich Bonhoeffer’s sublime and challenging Letters from Prison, in which he yearns for a Christ capable of offering mercy to a world, our world, then in the process of being martyred for a single man. Written in a cramped, dank, and putrid cell, where hope was meant to die before the body, Bonhoeffer crafted a book rich in faith, openness, possibility, and, yes, hope – even in humanity’s darkest hour.
One particular passage resonates with me as I contemplate Ukraine’s plight. As he awaited his approaching execution by the Nazis, Bonhoeffer wrote that, in prison, “the godlessness of the world is not...concealed but, rather, revealed, and is thus exposed to an unexpected light.”
So I take some comfort this Christmas in knowing that the godlessness, inhumanity, and criminality of the regime that is now ruling in Kyiv is, at long last, being exposed to the world in a clear light. Its democratic posturing has been unmasked as cynical political theater, its claim to desire a European future for Ukraine’s people revealed to be a lie, and the rapaciousness of its kleptocrats has been laid bare.
The everyday oppression, stifled media, and shakedowns and extortion of businesses for bribes all point to a mafia state on Europe’s border. Now our European friends can no longer deny the smug vileness of the regime with which they are forced to deal.
I am only a believer who cannot accept that our existence is the result of some freak cosmic accident. We are, I believe, part of a mysterious yet integral act, whose source, direction, and purpose, though difficult to grasp at times, does have meaning and purpose – even when one is confined behind prison bars.
It is only faith in the idea that our lives matter, and that our decisions must be judged by their moral content, that we in Ukraine, and elsewhere, will be able to find our way out of the misery, unhappiness, and despair that has consumed us over the last two years. It is within our power to recover or reinvigorate our freedoms and our societies, not by individual efforts, but by joining forces with likeminded people all over the world.
This Christmas, I ask my family and friends everywhere not to worry about me. As Anna Akhmatova, the great poetic chronicler of Stalin’s terror, said, “I am alive in this grave.”
Christmas is meant to mark the possibility of a new beginning for all men and women.
As Bonhoeffer affirmed with his last words: “This is for me...the beginning of life.”
A Private Affair?
Can a public figure have a private life? Recent events in three countries have highlighted the importance of this question.
When asked whether they were a couple, Royal replied, “Our lives belong to us.” Similarly, in response to rumors that President-elect Nicholas Sarkozy’s wife had left him, a spokesman for Sarkozy said, “That’s a private matter.”
The French have a long tradition of respecting the privacy of their politicians’ personal lives, and French public opinion is more broad-minded than in the United States, where an unwed mother of four would have no chance of being nominated for the presidency by a major party. Indeed, last month, Randall Tobias, the top foreign aid adviser in the US State Department, resigned after acknowledging that he had used an escort service described as providing “high-end erotic fantasy” – although Tobias said he only had a massage.
In Britain, Lord John Browne, the chief executive who transformed BP from a second-tier European oil company into a global giant, resigned after admitting he had lied in court about the circumstances in which he had met a gay companion (apparently, he met him through a male escort agency). In resigning, he said that he had always regarded his sexuality as a personal matter, and he was disappointed that a newspaper – The Mail on Sunday – had made it public.
Candidates for public office, and those holding high administrative or corporate positions, should be judged on their policies and performance, not on private acts that are irrelevant to how well they carry out, or will carry out, their public duties. Sometimes, of course, the two overlap.
As the administrator of the US Agency for International Development, Tobias implemented the Bush administration’s policy that requires organizations working against HIV/AIDS to condemn prostitution if they are to be eligible for US assistance. That policy has been criticized for making it more difficult to assist sex workers who are at high risk of contracting and spreading HIV/AIDS.
Where there is no suggestion that a matter of personal morality has had an impact on the performance of a business executive or government official, we should respect that person’s privacy. But what about candidates for political leadership?
Since politicians ask us to entrust them with sweeping powers, it can be argued that we should know as much as possible about their morality. For example, we might reasonably ask whether they pay their fair share of taxes, or inquire about their charitable donations.
It is hard to draw a line of principle around any area and determine if knowledge of it will provide relevant information about a politician’s moral character. The problem is that the media have an interest in publishing information that increases their audience, and personal information, especially of a sexual nature, will often do just that.
Even so, whether people choose to marry or not, whether they are heterosexual or homosexual, even whether they pay to fulfill their erotic fantasies or have fantasies they can fulfill at no cost, tells us little about whether they are good people who can be trusted with high office – unless, of course, they say one thing while doing another. If we can cultivate a wider tolerance of human diversity, politicians, business leaders, and administrators would be less fearful of “exposure,” because they would realize that they have done nothing that they must hide.
Prostitution is illegal in most of the US, including Washington DC, and this could be one reason why Tobias had to resign. But when New Jersey Governor John Corzine was involved in a serious road accident last month, it became known that he violated his own state’s law by not wearing his seat belt.
Arab Fathers and Sons
The deaths of Yasir Arafat and of Sheikh Zayd, the long-standing ruler of the United Arab Emirates, continues the generational change that began in 1999-2000, when the leaders of Jordan, Morocco, Bahrain, and Syria died in quick succession. Across the Middle East people are younger, and their political leaders older, than the world average.
At present, four political generations co-exist on the region’s socio-political map. The outgoing leadership generation – that of Arafat, King Hussein or Hafiz al-Assad, King Fahd and President Mubarak – was born before 1935 and has determined events in the Middle East since the 1970’s.
They were weaned on Gamal Abdel-Nasser’s pan-Arab nationalism, and the crucial political event for them was the Arab defeat in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war. Members of this generation sought a strong Arab leadership that would create a balance of power with Israel.
At the same time, political participation remained blocked by the previous generation, which never intended to give up power voluntarily. Unsurprisingly, many in this generation grew dissatisfied, and not a few began to look for Islamic alternatives to the prevailing political systems.
Rather than determining events in the coming two or three decades, this generation is likely to be sidelined by the next cohort, born between 1955 and 1975. This is the generation of Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, Jordan’s King Abdullah and Morocco’s King Muhammad VI.
Instead, their political education included the Gulf War of 1991 and the Arab-Israeli peace process of the 1990’s, with its crises and breakdown. Jailed West Bank Fatah leader Marwan Barghouti is as representative of this group as the leaders of Syria and Jordan.
Except for the Palestinians, they have never known their countries other than as independent and comparatively stable states. In the Palestinian territories, the jil al-intifada , the generation of the (first and second) Palestinian uprising, will likely become the founding generation.
But it is the fourth group that underscores the relevance of generational issues in the Arab world. Even when combined, the first three generations make up barely one-third of the entire Arab population.
This raises a key question: what happens to these Arab “baby boomers” if the generation now coming to power clings to it as tenaciously as the generation of Mubarak, Assad, and Hussein?
The political generation of Bashar al-Assad, King Abdullah, and Gamal Mubarak – son of Egypt’s ailing president – forms a less coherent picture than that of the outgoing leadership. In that elder generation, many had pursued military careers, and many of their aides and collaborators were engineers and civil servants.
Economists, bankers, and entrepreneurs as well as of technology or communication experts are common. There are also more traditional politicians: personalities who see themselves as representatives of particular social or economic interests, not as apolitical technocrats.
This new leadership elite is in many ways more cosmopolitan than its predecessors; their average level of education is higher; a few have foreign degrees. Women also play a somewhat greater role.
Developments in Morocco, Bahrain, and Jordan certainly seem to suggest that this changing of the guard can help soften rigid political structures and allow for broader participation. But generational change need not be accompanied by economic reform and steps towards political liberalization – witness North Korea under Kim Il Sung’s son, Kim Jong Il.
Indeed, experience gives little reason to presume that a modern way of speaking, willingness to liberalize the economy, and an urge for technological development automatically translates into a democratic opening. It is more realistic to expect that the new Arab elites will make use of their states’ authoritarian institutions, both to overcome resistance to their economic agendas and to consolidate their newly acquired power.
Without a significant increase in opportunities for political participation, including genuinely competitive elections, the chasm between a predominantly young population and a ruling elite with a narrow generational base will widen. Such continuing political inertia leaves an increasingly young Arab population prey to the appeal of extremist ideologies, while driving the best and brightest to seek their fortune elsewhere.
Arab Fathers and Sons
The problem of succession in the Arab secular republics highlights their predicament in the transition to a post-revolutionary phase, for succession in regimes that fail to build strong institutions always risks triggering a systemic crisis. While the decision by some in favor of dynastic succession may be lacking in democracy, it is not entirely devoid of merit.
Years of Western-backed repressive authoritarianism nipped in the bud any potential growth of a liberal alternative to the incumbent Arab regimes, and turned any abrupt move to free elections into a dangerous exercise in Islamic democracy. A democracy that produces governments led by Hamas, Hezbollah, or the Muslim Brotherhood is inevitably bound to be anti-Western and opposed to an American-inspired “peace process” with Israel.
Likewise, Libya’s Muammar Khaddafi may be succeeded by his son, Seif el Islam. As products of revolutionary military takeovers, these secular nationalist regimes failed to produce genuine popular legitimacy and have had to fall back on the dynastic succession practiced by the regimes they toppled.
The centrality of hereditary succession in the quest for peace and stability was shown by Hafez al-Assad when he agreed to unprecedented good will gestures aimed at drawing Ehud Barak’s Israeli government into a peace deal. An old and sick man who was to die a few months later, he acted with a sense of urgency to reach a deal that would relieve his inexperienced son of the burden of struggling for the recovery of the Golan Heights.
Bashar Assad remains essentially loyal to his father’s legacy. Not unlike North Korea’s and Iran’s defiant nuclear policies, Bashar’s membership in the region’s “axis of evil” is a call for dialogue with America, not an invitation to an invasion, and for a settlement with Israel, not a drive to wage war on it.
But he was more than willing to occupy center stage in Arab diplomacy’s support of the Annapolis peace conference. After all, the passion that the Palestinians’ plight evokes among ordinary Egyptians is a dangerous source of instability.
Mubarak’s succession is being conducted in an especially sophisticated manner. His son’s ascension, unlike that of Bashar on the eve of his father’s death, is anything but settled.
It may be, as President Mubarak’s critics argue, that the faltering progress of democratization reflects the attempt to block all potential challengers to Gamal. But, with the decline of secular nationalism and Islamism’s rise, the hidden electoral power of the Muslim Brotherhood poses a mortal threat to the regime and its strategic alliance with the West.
His abysmal human rights record remains, but the flamboyant “Guide of the Revolution” ceased flirting with weapons of mass destruction and global terrorism in exchange for the end of sanctions and international rehabilitation. A sick man whose rule at home is being challenged by Islamist opponents, he decided that international ostracism and domestic troubles is too explosive a combination for his son, a spoiled playboy, to handle.
The last of the revolutionary generation, President Abdulaziz Buteflika must still conceive a succession that ends his country’s civil war. Fully-fledged democracy might lead to victory for Islamists, as it did in 1991.
But, as countries like Egypt, Syria, and Lybia might be indicating, hereditary succession is not an inherently reactionary move. Rather, it means opting for a controlled transition to a post-revolutionary phase in which economic modernization and international integration might usher in greater political change in the future.
Arafat’s Last Hurrrah
He withstood a series of protracted sieges – in Amman (1970), Beirut (1982), and in Ramallah (2002-2004). Arafat’s leadership was the most protracted among his counterparts in the Arab World, as he outlived three Egyptian Presidents (Naguib, Nasser, Sadat and spanned all of Mubarak’s quarter of a century), five Lebanese Presidents, three Iraqis, five Algerians, three Syrians, three Saudi Monarchs, and two in Morocco, not to mention other world leaders, from Eisenhower to Bush in the US, from de Gaulle to Chirac in France, and from Maó to three successors in China.
For several decades after the usurpation of their homeland, Palestinians were reduced to aggregates of refugees, some remaining in the newly-created state of Israel as second-class citizens, with others scattered over the Arab World and far beyond. It was Yasir Arafat, through the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) he founded, that gave them a sense of identity as a people.
Regardless of its effectiveness, the armed struggle waged by the PLO did empower the Palestinians and internalize a sense of collective dignity and self respect within them. Their cause could no longer be ignored.
If politics is defined as the art of compromise, Arafat was a master of it at the Palestinian and Arab levels. He managed to stay at the helm for over forty years with no serious challengers.
Whether or not he was solely to blame, a true opportunity for historical compromise was missed at Camp David in August 2000, and he himself acknowledged it a year later. By that time it was too late, as the leadership in both the US and Israel had changed and there was no interest to engage him.
During the last four years of his life, Arafat’s public space was literally and metaphorically diminishing. He was unable to re-engage his Israeli adversaries or control his suicide-bound Palestinian militants.
Nor was Arafat helped by world events that shifted the spotlight to Bush’s wars on terrorism in Afghanistan and Iraq. If anything, they had adverse effects for him and his life-long cause.
Ironically however, as he was dying, world leaders and the media were rediscovering the importance of Arafat’s leadership if not his persona. The sustained focus of the media on him, to the point of near saturation, focused world attention on the Palestinian Question once again.
Statements by Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac, Kofi Annan and others on the occasion of Arafat’s death have been forceful in demanding a speedy and long overdue resolution of the conflict. It is as if in death, Arafat has given his people a chance to achieve what he could not achieve in life –the dream of an independent democratic Palestinian state.
Immunization on the Front Line
