NEW YORK – Over the last two years, the majority of countries in the world chose to expand public spending in order to buffer the impact of the global financial crisis on their economies and populations. But, this year, with signs of economic recovery emerging, advanced countries have quickly shifted from fiscal stimulus to fiscal consolidation.
Now developing countries are also following the trend to consolidate. A recent UNICEF survey of 126 countries shows that a significant number of low- and middle-income countries are expected to reduce public expenditures in 2010-2011.
This comes at a bad time, just after world governments committed themselves to achieving the development goals, such as reducing poverty and infant mortality, agreed last September at the United Nations’ Millennium Summit.
For most low- and middle-income countries, the incipient economic recovery appears to be fragile and uneven. Indeed, many of these countries remain vulnerable to volatile commodity prices, financial-system weaknesses, depressed demand from world markets, and shortfalls in external finance, overseas development assistance, and investment.
More importantly, according to the UN and the World Bank, the social impact of the global economic crisis continues to be felt in terms of rising hunger, unemployment, and social unrest. The combination of rising food and fuel prices and the financial and economic crisis has reduced poor families’ purchasing power, access to social services, and employment opportunities.
Moreover, poor households have reduced food consumption, with the UN Food and Agricultural Organization estimating that nearly one billion people are hungry and malnourished. In addition to the millions already pushed into poverty in 2008-09, another 64 million could fall into extreme poverty during 2010 as a result of the combined, lingering effects of the crisis.
In the 1980’s, adjustment programs required countries to cut back on their expenditures, including outlays on education, health, water, agriculture, and other sectors that make a difference to poor households. As the late Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere demanded publicly: “Must we starve our children to pay our debts?”
