UNICEF responded with Adjustment with a Human Face, which argued that children must be protected during economic crises. It argued for more expansionary macroeconomic policies to generate employment, public-sector investments to serve the poor, and the establishment of social-protection systems.
The poor in developing countries are again being made to endure the worst consequences of a crisis that they played no part in creating. It is critically important that this does not lead to a new lost decade of development, and that poor households – especially children – do not suffer as they did in the 1980‘s.
And yet that could very well happen. Our UNICEF survey of 126 developing countries found that among the nearly one-half that are reducing public expenditures, common adjustment measures include public-sector wage cuts or caps, withdrawal of food subsidies, and the targeting and rationalization of already meager social-protection systems.
How many poor children will suffer – or die – from lack of food and health care? How many children will miss out on education because teachers are absent due to low wages, or simply because poor children must work to supplement their family income?
Adjustment of public expenditures raises the risk of a recovery that discriminates against the poor, and thus fuels greater inequities in developing countries. Premature fiscal contraction and/or withdrawal of countercyclical measures threaten the public support that is essential to promoting recovery among those hardest hit by the crisis.
As the global recession ebbs, the most urgent imperative is recovery for all – a recovery that is inclusive, expands employment opportunities, reduces inequalities, and sustains development processes.
This can be achieved. It requires that aid to poor countries be sustained; that governments focus on expansionary macroeconomic policies that support employment and broad-based economic activities; that new schemes be introduced to extend health services and social protection for the poor; and that investments in education, water supply, sanitation, agriculture, and food security receive the support they need.
What Good Are Economists?
