NEW YORK – Spanish MPs want to legislate restraints that would prevent a few of the country’s judges from exercising what has seemed like a roving license to prosecute in Spanish courts human-rights violations committed anywhere in the world. In a current case, a Spanish judge is seeking arrest warrants against Jiang Zemin, the former president of China, and Li Peng, a former Chinese prime minister, for alleged crimes committed in Tibet.
The Spanish MPs have a point: Allowing the country’s prosecuting magistrates to select targets from anywhere in the world, without there being a clear legal nexus to Spain, is an invitation to politicize the process.
But it is also important to preserve the core principle underlying these prosecutions: the concept of universal jurisdiction. Indeed, it is a concept with ancient origins, and it plays a crucial role in the global protection of human rights.
Universal jurisdiction originated in Greek and Roman times in the struggle against piracy. Because pirates committed their crimes on the high seas, beyond the territory of any state, the idea developed that they were enemies of humanity whom any state could prosecute.
In the seventeenth century, the Dutch scholar Hugo Grotius, who is recognized for codifying international law, argued that pirates could be tried for their crimes, regardless of where they were committed, aboard the ships that captured them. Following the 1814-1815 Congress of Vienna, with its condemnation of slavery, some states applied the concept to slave traders, who also committed many of their crimes outside national jurisdictions.
At the end of World War II, Nazi leaders fled, relocating all over the world. Countries like Canada and Australia, seeking certainty that those who had committed horrendous crimes would not find safe haven within their borders, established the authority to try suspects in their own courts.
The 1949 Geneva Conventions require states to search for those who have committed war crimes and either prosecute them in their own courts or turn them over to another state that is prepared to try them. Similarly, the 1984 Convention Against Torture requires states to establish their own jurisdiction to prosecute torture if an offender is on their territory and is not extradited to stand trial in the country where the crime was committed.
A crucial test of universal jurisdiction is now moving forward in Senegal, where one of Africa’s cruelest dictators, Hissène Habré, who ruled Chad from 1982 to 1990, is set to be prosecuted. A commission of inquiry established that, during its time in power, Habré’s regime carried out torture and was responsible for the deaths of an estimated 40,000 people.
When Habré was deposed, he fled to Senegal with a substantial portion of the national treasury, living there in comfort with much of his extended family, as well as key supporters. For many years, African human-rights activists, aided by Human Rights Watch, struggled to hold him accountable.
A related practice has developed in the United States, where victims of human-rights crimes committed elsewhere file civil suits against immigrant perpetrators. In a substantial number of cases since the early 1980’s, US courts have ordered the defendants to pay compensation to the victims.
Most often, universal jurisdiction is invoked when the person alleged to have committed war crimes, crimes against humanity, or genocide in another country is present in the territory where he or she is to be tried. This is consistent with the principle that there should be no safe haven for those who commit such crimes.
If Spain incorporates such a requirement in its law, and also provides for some other appropriate connection (such as the inclusion of Spaniards among the victims), it will overcome the tendency of a few of its judges to reach out too widely. Such a reform would remain faithful to the principles of justice that underlie the concept of universal jurisdiction.
As China Turns
This motto helped catalyze China into becoming what it is today: an increasingly materialistic, money-worshipping society that has lost touch with traditional ethics. Nothing captures this moral vacuum more vividly than the recent television drama, “Wo Ju” (“Crowded Spaces”), which has been riveting Chinese audiences.
The program’s “hero,” Guo Haizao, is a fair-skinned and innocent 25-year-old woman living near Shanghai. Initially she follows in her older sister’s footsteps in quest of their common dream, to attend one of China’s top universities.
“Why is the world so full of unfairness, with the limelight only splashing on the prettiest spots in the city?” she wonders one night, as she worries about her and her sister’s struggle to buy a home.
As Song Siming, a handsome, successful, and Audi-driving – but also married – secretary to the Mayor, tells her, “On those unsightly corners in the dark where dirt, flies, and rats wander, nobody's paying attention.”
Little by little, Guo finds herself taken in by his charm and ability to get things done. Before long, she is cheating on her boyfriend and swooning into Song’s arms and bed.
When Guo overhears fights between her sister and brother-in-law in their crammed rented room, her aspirations to get an apartment through hard work, and to start a family with her boyfriend and soon-to-be husband, begin to fade. She is tempted by the shortcut Song promises and allows herself to be seduced by him in turn for a large sum of cash and luxury apartment.
“Wo Ju” is an adaptation of a novel about recent skyrocketing housing prices in Chinese cities – especially in Shanghai – and the effect of real-estate fever on young Chinese men and women in today’s get-rich-by-any-means China. Through the soap opera, viewers get a sense of how the Chinese dream has begun to center around property ownership rather than education or love, and how this change has been transforming Chinese society, sometimes in startling ways.
These changes have created a new kind of hope and despair among the generation of Chinese now coming of age. But, of course, the sub-text is that if this fixation on property has also led to greater pragmatism in affairs of the heart, it has also led to a worrisome property bubble that many economists now fear could soon burst.
Then, because this is a soap opera, Song suddenly dies in a car crash, just as he is rushing to the hospital – while being chased by corruption investigators! – to check on his sweetheart and their unborn baby boy. But, as it happens, only days before Guo secretly had an abortion, right after a dramatic fight with Song’s wife.
As fantastic and convoluted as the plot sometimes gets, “Wo Ju” offers a truthful look at what animates contemporary Chinese society: property, money, sex, cars, and power. Perhaps because it captures the zeitgeist so well, the program has become hugely popular, so much so that it has recently caught the attention of media censors.
While the official media are flooding television and cinema screens with propaganda about Confucius, ancient fairytales, and kung fu epics, “Wo Ju” engages a broad cross-section of contemporary society, which sees in it troubling aspects of their own lives: official corruption, mistresses, even house slaves. As Song arrogantly says to Guo before he dies, “As long as it’s a problem that we can solve with money, then it’s not a big problem.”
Many Web sites and bulletin boards have run surveys with questions like, “If you were Guo Haizao, would you choose Song Siming and an apartment or Xiaobei (the dumped boyfriend) and true love?” On one of China’s largest sites, 46% picked Song, while only 22% chose the young boyfriend, a choice that suggests where the new generation’s values now lay.
The traditional virtues of “true love” have been replaced by pragmatism and a willingness to become a mistress before youth expires and all chances of getting a good apartment are lost. After all, many netizens now argue, does not such a practical course of action save many years of hard work?
Indeed, while Song may be cast as an anti-hero, in contemporary China, he is considered a “good catch.” More and more young women are making just such practical choices: putting an apartment before love and pragmatism before principle.
Trashing the ASEAN Brand
