NEW YORK – This year’s annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund made clear that Europe and the international community remain rudderless when it comes to economic policy. Financial leaders, from finance ministers to leaders of private financial institutions, reiterated the current mantra: the crisis countries have to get their houses in order, reduce their deficits, bring down their national debts, undertake structural reforms, and promote growth.
It is a little precious to hear such pontifications from those who, at the helm of central banks, finance ministries, and private banks, steered the global financial system to the brink of ruin – and created the ongoing mess. Worse, seldom is it explained how to square the circle.
Decreased rates of household formation – young Americans, for example, are increasingly moving back in with their parents – depress housing prices, leading to still more foreclosures. States with balanced-budget frameworks are forced to cut spending as tax revenues fall – an automatic destabilizer that Europe seems mindlessly bent on adopting.
Using it for investment would enhance long-term growth, with positive spillovers to the rest of Europe. A long-recognized principle is that balanced expansion of taxes and spending stimulates the economy; if the program is well designed (taxes at the top, combined with spending on education), the increase in GDP and employment can be significant.
The lesson is obvious:&#160; the whole is more than the sum of its parts. If Europe – particularly the European Central Bank – were to borrow, and re-lend the proceeds, the costs of servicing Europe’s debt would fall, creating room for the kinds of expenditure that would promote growth and employment.
The EIB should expand its lending. There need to be increased funds available to support small and medium-size enterprises – the main source of job creation in all economies – which is especially important, given that credit contraction by banks hits these enterprises especially hard.
Taking the lectures seriously – &#160;even adopting tight budget frameworks –&#160;can be counterproductive. Regardless of whether Europe’s problems are temporary or fundamental – the eurozone, for example, is far from an “optimal” currency area, and tax competition in a free-trade and free-migration area can erode a viable state – austerity will make matters worse.
And the crisis itself almost surely will spread. Firewalls won’t work, if kerosene is simultaneously thrown on the fire, as Europe seems committed to doing: there is no example of a large economy – and Europe is the world’s largest – recovering as a result of austerity.
As a result, society’s most valuable asset, its human capital, is being wasted and even destroyed. Young people who are long deprived of a decent job – and youth unemployment in some countries is approaching or exceeding 50%, and has been unacceptably high since 2008 – become alienated.
So many economies are vulnerable to natural disasters – earthquakes, floods, typhoons, hurricanes, tsunamis –&#160;that adding a man-made disaster is all the more tragic. But that is what Europe is doing.
The pain that Europe, especially its poor and young, is suffering is unnecessary. Fortunately, there is an alternative.
After Kyoto
Now is the time to start thinking about how to engage all nations, including large emitters, in conversations about what to do after the treaty’s expiration in 2012. This is exactly what the European Commission did recently by providing its first strategy for a post-Kyoto era, which will be discussed by the European Council next March.
While the Kyoto Protocol represents only a modest reduction of carbon emissions in industrialized countries – 5.2% between 2008-2012 relative to 1990 levels, with varying targets for individual countries – real progress can be made in sustaining development efforts and preserving our planet.
But first, all countries must integrate climate concerns into policy planning, and improve their governance in key sectors such as energy, infrastructure, and transport. In other words, we must act in accordance with the recognition that climate change and its effects on people in both rich and poor countries remains a threat to global security.
At the end of the day, the long-term approach is likely to include a rules-based system, an incentives system, and investments in technology change. Increasingly, adaptation at the national level will be recognized as a major issue that will require appropriate funding.
Nations could set the more ambitious goal of limiting the long-term change in the earth’s temperature, and then assign emissions rights among countries in such a way that will eventually limit temperature increases to an acceptable level. This would require increasing investments in energy research and development for new and improved technologies – a process that needs to be supported by stronger public-private partnerships.
However, it is the developing countries – and thus the world’s poor – who are most vulnerable. It is unrealistic to ask poor countries, where more than 1.6 billion people do not have access to clean energy and technologies, to bear the costs associated with the much needed technological change.
Working with partners, the World Bank is supporting financial strategies to assist developing countries in meeting the costs caused by climate change. To date, over $1 billion dollars in Global Environment Facility (GEF) grants, together with about $8 billion in co-financing, have been committed to programs related to climate change.
While the regulatory mechanisms of both Kyoto and the European Trading Scheme have contributed to the establishment of an emerging market for carbon trading, interested parties are now concerned about the immediate future. Without a regulatory framework beyond 2012, the window of opportunity for initiating project-based transactions will close by 2006/2007.
Given the long lead time between project preparation and the first benefits of emissions reductions, project developers have only a few years to act before carbon payments cease to make a meaningful contribution to project finance in the current context. Developing infrastructure projects is a long process that requires 3-7 years from identification, through licensing, financing, and construction, and finally to the first certification of carbon emission reductions.
The World Bank has been instrumental in advancing carbon finance as a viable development tool, and in facilitating private-sector participation in the market. The Bank is focused on representing the interests of its borrowing countries, helping them to develop assets for carbon trading according to their own priorities.
But, without a commitment by governments to limit greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2012, the carbon market will remain uncertain, and the private sector – vital to the market’s success – is unlikely to expand its participation in a meaningful and sustained way. According to a recent World Bank-supported survey of companies interested in carbon finance, only one in five respondents declared that they were interested in buying post-2012 emissions reductions.
Now is the chance to look forward and enlist the global community – with no exclusions, although with differentiated responsibilities – in the pursuit of a more secure world, one that avoids the dire risks of environmental degradation and social conflict implied by inaction.
Selepas Serangan di Paris
Alasan mengapa ISIS memutuskan untuk melakukan serangannya sekarang masih berupa dugaan; barangkali ISIS memperluas terornya ke tingkat global untuk mengimbangi kehilangan wilayah mereka di Irak. Tetapi, apapun alasannya, wajib bagi kita untuk memberi respon jelas.
Sebetulnya, tantangan yang ditimbulkan ISIS justru menjadi seruan bagi kita untuk menerapkan beberapa tindakan, sebab tidak ada kebijakan tunggal yang memadai. Berbagai upaya perlu diterapkan di berbagai bidang.
Serangan udara yang lebih kuat untuk melemahkan aset-aset militer, fasilitas minyak dan gas, dan para pemimpin ISIS sangat penting. Meskipun demikian, serangan udara saja tidak akan cukup.
Sayangnya, kita tidak punya cukup waktu untuk membangun kekuatan gabungan di darat dari nol. Upaya ini sudah dicoba namun gagal, dan negara-negara Arab tidak mampu atau tidak mau membentuk armadanya.
Pilihan terbaik adalah bekerja sama lebih erat dengan tentara Kurdi dan memilih warga dari suku Sunni di Irak dan Suriah. Hal ini berarti menyediakan intelijen, senjata, dan kemauan untuk menugaskan lebih banyak tentara – lebih dari 3.500 tentara Amerika sudah bertugas disana dan kemungkinan akan ada penambahan 10.000 tentara – untuk melatih, memberi masukan, dan membantu mengarahkan tindakan militer.
Bentuknya bisa informal – “koalisi negara-negara yang bersedia” (coalition of the willing) yang meliputi Amerika Serikat, Perancis, Britania Raya, negara-negara Arab, dan bahkan Rusia dalam kondisi yang tepat – atau dilaksanakan di bawah naungan NATO atau PBB. Tidak masalah apapun bentuk atau kemasannya, yang penting adalah hasilnya.
Presiden Suriah, Bashar al-Assad, adalah sosok yang layaknya menjadi recruiting tools bagi ISIS dan harus dicopot dari jabatannya. Siapapun yang meneruskan jabatan beliau harus mampu menjaga ketertiban dan melarang ISIS memanfaatkan kekosongan kekuasaan, seperti yang terjadi di Libya.
Satu opsi jangka pendek yang patut dicoba adalah pembentukan pemerintah koalisi yang masih dipimpin oleh perwakilan dari kelompok minoritas Alawite, suatu persetujuan yang sepadan dengan mencopot jabatan Assad. Secara prinsip, dan seiring berjalannya waktu, pemerintah pusat yang lebih representatif akan terbentuk, walaupun pembahasan mengenai rencana pemilihan umum dalam waktu 18 bulan ke depan nampaknya terlalu bermuluk-muluk.
Itulah sebabnya penguatan upaya militer diperlukan untuk menjadikan daerah-daerah kantong lebih aman dan luas sehingga mampu melindungi penduduk sipil dan memerangi ISIS. Suriah bukanlah negara yang hidup dalam kondisi layak dan normal, bahkan mungkin tidak akan bisa kembali ke kondisi normal.
Elemen lainnya yang sangat diperlukan dalam strategi efektif apapun harus meliputi bantuan tambahan atau memberi tekanan kepada Turki untuk mengambil lebih banyak tindakan demi membendung rekrutmen ISIS. Turki, bersama dengan Yordania dan Lebanon, memerlukan bantuan finansial lebih besar sebab mereka memikul sebagian besar beban karena persoalan pengungsi.
Retail terrorists – individu atau kelompok melakukan serangan bersenjata ke kelompok rentan di masyarakat – sangat sulit diatasi. Ancaman dan terjadinya beberapa serangan mengharuskan ketahanan sosial yang lebih kuat dan sedapat mungkin menyeimbangkan ulang antara privasi individu dan keamanan kolektif.
Perjuangan melawan Negara Islam bukanlah perang konvensional. Kita tidak bisa memberantas atau menghancurkannya dalam waktu dekat, sebab ISIS merupakan jaringan dan gagasan, serta suatu organisasi dan negara de facto yang mengendalikan wilayah dan sumber daya.
Meskipun demikian, kabar baiknya adalah ancaman yang diakibatkan ISIS ke Timur Tengah dan seluruh dunia dapat dikurangi secara signifikan melalui tindakan terpadu dan berkelanjutan. Pembelajaran utama dari serangan di Paris adalah kita harus siap bertindak kapan pun dan dimanapun.
After Pax Americana?
