PROVIDENCE, RI – During the past few years, many experts have suggested that bipolar disorder – a serious illness resulting in significant psychosocial morbidity and excess mortality – is under-recognized, particularly in patients with major depression. Even patients who are diagnosed with bipolar disorder often wait more than 10 years after initially seeking treatment for the correct diagnosis to be made.
The clinical implications of the failure to recognize bipolar disorder in depressed patients include the under-prescription of mood-stabilizing medications, and an increased risk of rapid “cycling” – swings between manic and depressive phases. But, perhaps as a consequence of concerted efforts to improve the recognition of bipolar disorder, during the past few years we have observed the emergence of an opposite phenomenon – over-diagnosis.
In my own practice, my colleagues and I have encountered patients who reported that they were previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder, despite lacking a history of manic or hypomanic episodes. To be sure, we have also seen patients seeking treatment for depression who really did have bipolar disorder.
We therefore conducted a study to examine empirically how often bipolar disorder might be over- and under-diagnosed. Seven hundred psychiatric outpatients were interviewed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID) and completed a self-administered questionnaire that asked whether they had been previously diagnosed by a health-care professional with bipolar or manic-depressive disorder.
Patients with SCID-diagnosed bipolar disorder had a significantly higher risk of bipolar disorder in their immediate family members than patients who self-reported a previous diagnosis of bipolar disorder that was not confirmed by the SCID. Patients who self-reported a previous diagnosis of bipolar disorder that was not confirmed by the SCID did not have a significantly higher risk for bipolar disorder than the patients who were negative for bipolar disorder by self-report and the SCID.
Any study seeking to determine whether a psychiatric disorder is over-diagnosed will find that some patients with the condition do not have it upon re-interview. Such is the nature of the imperfect reliability of psychiatric diagnosis.
Mood stabilizers are the treatment of choice, and, depending on the medication, they can produce potentially significant health complications affecting renal, endocrine, hepatic, immunologic, or metabolic function. Thus, over-diagnosing bipolar disorder can unnecessarily expose patients to serious side-effects of medication.
The impact of marketing efforts by pharmaceutical companies and publicity probably plays a role in the emerging tendency to over-diagnose bipolar disorder. Direct-to-consumer advertisements that refer individuals to screening questionnaires can result in patients suggesting to their doctors that they have bipolar disorder.
Clinicians are inclined to diagnose disorders that they feel more comfortable treating. We believe that the increased availability of medications that have been approved for the treatment of bipolar disorder might be influencing clinicians who are unsure whether or not a patient has bipolar disorder or borderline personality disorder to err on the side of diagnosing the disorder that is responsive to medication.
This bias is reinforced by the marketing message of pharmaceutical companies to physicians, which has emphasized research on delayed diagnosis and under-recognition of bipolar disorder, possibly sensitizing clinicians accordingly. The campaign against under-recognition has probably resulted in some anxious, agitated, and/or irritable depressed patients who complain of insomnia and “racing thoughts” being misdiagnosed with bipolar disorder.
The results of our study are consistent with prior studies suggesting possible problems with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder. With the greater number of medications approved for the treatment of bipolar disorder, along with multiple reports cautioning clinicians against under-diagnosis, it appears that over-diagnosis has become a greater problem than under-diagnosis.
Ambivalent Arabia
Kuwait now allows women to vote, Qatar has embraced an ambitious reform program, Bahrain has shown great tolerance of mass demonstrations, and the U.A.E. is allowing something like a free press. But Saudi Arabia continues to be deeply wary of any sort of change, and thus remains a huge and seemingly immovable obstacle to region-wide reform.
Although the Saudi ruling family, the al-Saud, is under enormous pressure to follow the example of its neighbors, internal resistance to doing so remains very strong. So the al-Saud have become Janus-faced: looking in one direction, the royal family encourages democratic reformers to speak out; looking in the opposite direction, it jails them when they do.
Their crime was to call for a constitutional monarchy. The official verdict states that they threatened national unity, challenged those in authority, and incited public opinion against the state while using “foreign,” that is, Western, terminology.
Not long after the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, these liberal reformers joined with 160 other professionals to write and sign a petition to Crown Prince Abdullah asking for reforms. The petition called for the monarchy to work within constitutionally prescribed limits, and for an independent judiciary.
The reformers believe that such reforms are the only way for Saudi Arabia to survive the threat of violence, instability, and national fragmentation that is looming on its horizon. Only a constitution, they argue, can restore much needed legitimacy to a political system that is widely perceived as deeply corrupt and inept.
But his half-brother and more powerful rival, Prince Naif, the Minister of Interior, ordered the arrests, trial, and imprisonment of 13 reformers in March 2004. Crown Prince Abdullah offered not a peep of opposition, leaving the reform agenda that he initiated in a political netherworld.
In order to maintain absolutist power and to minimize public anger, the Saudi princes, led by Prince Naif, asked the reformers to sign an agreement that they would never again ask for reform. Prince Naif bans the very word “reform” from public discourse, because it suggests that there is something wrong with the system; his preferred term is “development.”
Of the thirteen reformers who were arrested, ten submitted to this demand, but the other three refused and have paid the price. They remained in jail in Riyadh without legal representation until the final verdict.
Under regional and international pressure, the Saudi ruling family has constructed a Potemkin village of reform while retaining absolute control over all political developments. Earlier this year, they staged partial, and tightly regulated municipal elections, with no independent opinion permitted to influence when and how the ballots were held.
The al-Saud face two threats: one from violent Islamists, and the other from liberal reformers. There is every indication that they fear the reformers far more.
Indeed, killing violent Islamists and al-Qaeda affiliates is applauded by the international community, especially the United States, as success in the “war on terrorism.” But as they hunt down and kill violent domestic extremists, they are quietly tightening the noose around all those who want moderate reform.
So, unlike in Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgizstan, and Lebanon, it does nothing to encourage popular opposition. As long as the Saudi regime meets America’s oil needs and fights Islamist radicals, it will continue to receive US support and silence – and hence its tacit consent.
The liberal reformers who have been jailed could have paved the way for a peaceful transition to a reformed Saudi Arabia. By jailing them, the regime has made it clear that violence is the only avenue open to those seeking change.
Algeria’s Dying Dictatorship
