MADRID – The United States is gearing up for that most intoxicating (and exhausting) of political events: an open-seat race for the presidency. With US President Barack Obama's eight years in office coming to an end, and Vice President Joe Biden unlikely to run, the race will be without an incumbent.
The potential candidates have already sought to stake out their positions on key foreign-policy issues, with early Republican frontrunner Jeb Bush, for example, delivering a speech devoted entirely to the topic. As for the Democrats, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's likely nomination (despite recent revelations that she used her personal email account to conduct government business) reinforces foreign policy's centrality to the election.
Recognizing this trend, the World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council has brought together a group of experts and practitioners to help infuse substance into the foreign-policy discussions leading up to the US election, including by preparing a public discussion paper. From my perspective as the group's only European member, the overarching message should be that the US must conceive of itself not as “the indispensable power," as it now does, but as “the indispensable partner."
But the payoff, for both the US and the liberal world order that it created, would be substantial. The key to success will be America's ability to retain the best – and abandon the worst – of that most American of notions: exceptionalism.
The idea extends as far back as 1630, when John Winthrop, the Massachusetts Bay Colony's first governor, declared that his community must act as a “city upon a hill," setting an example for the world. In doing so, he planted the seed of the values-based approach that was adopted by the US as it spearheaded the development of the rules and structures that order today's world.
Those rules and structures have delivered unprecedented economic growth, benefiting all (though the US has reaped the greatest rewards). But, ironically, the notion of American exceptionalism often has led the US to undermine the international system that it nurtured.
This tendency was not a serious issue before World War II (though the people of Abyssinia and Manchuria may beg to differ). But today, US withdrawal from the international system that it built has serious ramifications – namely, the kind of chaos and lawlessness exemplified by Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Worse is its “exemptionalism": its penchant for opting out of the rules that it promotes – and often actively enforces – elsewhere. The lengthy – and growing – list of major international conventions left unratified by the US includes the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Mine Ban Convention, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Beyond the resentment that such an attitude engenders, American exemptionalism directly undermines multilateral institutions' capacity to address challenges that the US is unwilling or unable to resolve on its own. How can the US expect China to follow rules on maritime delimitation in the East and South China Seas when it refuses to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea?
US President Barack Obama's administration has tried to create the illusion of a change of course in this regard, pushing “soft" deals that allow the US to participate without submitting to binding rules. Such was the case with the much-lauded “handshake agreement" between Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping on carbon-dioxide emissions in November.
But, though such arrangements make for great headlines, they do not provide the stability and predictability necessary for long-term success. For that, hard rules and strong institutions are essential.
If the US is to serve as the world's “indispensable partner," it must recommit to the rules-based order that has served it – and the world – so well for the last seven decades. It should begin by strengthening the flagging institutions that have served as the backbone of the liberal international order.
It requires vision, commitment, and, most important, leadership. A frank discussion about America's foreign policy could prove vital to ensuring that this “city upon a hill" remains a beacon of hope – and a catalyst of progress.
American Foreign Policy after Iraq
If President George W. Bush’s current troop “surge” fails to produce an outcome that can be called “victory,” what lessons will the United States draw for its future foreign policy? Will it turn inward, as it did after its defeat in Vietnam three decades ago?
Some neo-conservative pundits drew the conclusion that the US was so powerful that it could decide what it thought was right, and others would have to follow. Charles Krauthammer celebrated this view as “the new unilateralism,” and it heavily influenced the Bush administration even before the attacks on September 11, 2001.
For example, a large, modern tank army is a powerful resource if a war is fought in a desert, but not if it is fought in a swamp – as America discovered in Vietnam. In the past, it was assumed that military power dominated most issues, but in today’s world, the contexts of power differ greatly.
But on the middle board of economic relations, the world is already multipolar, and the US cannot obtain the outcomes it wants without the cooperation of Europe, Japan, China, and others. And, on the bottom board of transnational issues outside the control of governments – including everything from climate change to pandemics to transnational terrorism – power is chaotically distributed, and it makes no sense at all to claim American hegemony.
Yet it is on this bottom board that we find most of the greatest challenges we face today. The only way to grapple with these problems is through cooperation with others, and that requires the “soft” power of attraction as well as the hard power of coercion.
The new unilateralists who dominated Bush’s first administration made the mistake of thinking that the unipolar distribution of power in the military context was sufficient to guide foreign policy. They were like a young boy with a hammer who thinks that every problem resembles a nail.
In Bush’s second term, some of the most extreme unilateralists have departed from the government, and the president has approached difficult problems like North Korea or Iran with a more multilateral approach than during his first term. Likewise, for all the complaints about the United Nations, the US and others turned to UN peacekeepers to sort out the mess after the Lebanon War last summer.
Americans now view cooperative action on global climate change more favorably. Similarly, the threat of pandemics means that Americans may come to recognize the importance of a stronger World Health Organization, just as the problem of nuclear proliferation is increasing awareness of the importance of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The nature of these problems means that the US does not have the luxury of turning inward no matter what the outcome in Iraq. These are not problems you can leave overseas.
It also is unlikely that American foreign policy will return to a narrow realism and drop all emphasis on democracy and human rights. While the Iraq War discredited the idea of coercive democratization, both Republicans and Democrats have a strong strand of idealism in their foreign policy orientations.
The problem for whoever is elected president in 2008 will be to find appropriate realistic means to advance democratic values and adjust official rhetoric accordingly. When rhetoric greatly outstrips reality, others view it as hypocrisy.
What Iraq has taught is the importance of developing civil society and the rule of law before trying to hold broad-based elections. Democracy is more than voting, for it requires large investments in education, institutions, and promotion of non-governmental organizations.
It is highly unlikely that the US will react after Iraq as it did after Vietnam. The paradox of American power is that the world’s only military superpower cannot protect its citizens by acting alone.
American Foreign Policy After the Mid-Term Elections
