NEW YORK – The 2008 financial crisis marked the end of the global order as we knew it. In advance of the upcoming G-8 summit, it is impossible to overlook the fact that, for the first time in seven decades, the United States cannot drive the international agenda or provide global leadership on all of today’s most pressing problems.
Indeed, the US has trimmed its presence abroad by refusing to contribute to a eurozone bailout, intervene in Syria, or use force to contain Iran’s nuclear breakout (despite strong Israeli support). President Barack Obama officially ended the war in Iraq, and is withdrawing US troops from Afghanistan at a pace constrained only by the need to save face.
In short, US foreign policy may be as active as ever, but it is downsizing and becoming more exacting about its priorities. As a result, many global challenges – climate change, trade, resource scarcity, international security, cyber-warfare, and nuclear proliferation, to name a few – are bound to loom larger.
Welcome to the G-Zero world, a more turbulent, uncertain environment in which coordination on global policy issues falls by the wayside. Paradoxically, this new environment, though daunting, is less troublesome for the US; in fact, it provides fresh opportunities for the US to capitalize on its unique position.
Its defense expenditures represent nearly half the world total, and exceed those of the next 17 countries combined. The dollar remains the world’s reserve currency, and investors’ scramble into US government debt at every peak in the crisis since 2008 has underscored America’s safe-haven status (even in crises that America caused).
Likewise, the US continues to lead in entrepreneurship, research and development, higher education, and technological innovation. Moreover, it is now the world’s largest natural-gas producer and calorie exporter, which has reduced its vulnerability to price shocks or food shortages.
No country rivals America’s promotion of the rule of law, liberal democracy, transparency, and free enterprise. While other countries certainly support these values, only the US has been willing, healthy, and big enough to ensure that they prevail.
Consider Asia, for example.&nbsp;As China’s economic importance and regional influence grows, its neighbors are seeking to deepen ties with the US. Japan, Australia, Indonesia, and Taiwan have all recently closed trade and security-related deals with the US.
In other words, in a G-Zero world, an increasingly aggressive global environment makes the US all the more appealing to countries seeking to hedge their bets.&nbsp;As a result, the US has an opportunity to act more precisely in its own interests. Supplying less leadership allows the US to weigh opportunity costs before taking action, and to select the issues and circumstances that suit it the best.&nbsp;In this environment, military intervention in Libya does not necessitate the same in Syria.
In fact, America’s short-term advantages pose the biggest obstacle to its long-term outlook. Call this the “safe-haven curse”:&nbsp;as long as the US remains the safest port in any storm, it faces no immediate pressure to address its weaknesses.
Over the long term, however, US policymakers must make steady progress in restoring confidence in the nation’s fiscal health by cutting politically sacred programs like social security, Medicare, and defense. Officials will have to put aside short-term motives and party orthodoxy to bolster America’s aging infrastructure, reform its education and immigration systems, and pursue long-term fiscal consolidation.
But, by cushioning against sufficiently calamitous risks, the same advantages allow the US to procrastinate. American politicians need to recognize the new G-Zero reality and rebuild America’s domestic sources of strength, even if only incrementally.&nbsp;If they do, the US will have the vigor and flexibility to shape the next world order.
America’s political system usually works well in crises.&nbsp;But, thanks to its residual advantages in a leaderless world, the US need not rely on a crisis to precipitate action. It need only seize the G-Zero moment.
America’s Houses of Cards
There are times when being proven right brings no pleasure. For several years, I argued that America’s economy was being supported by a housing bubble that had replaced the stock market bubble of the 1990’s.
As one of my predecessors as Chairman of the US President’s Council of Economic Advisers famously put it, “that which is not sustainable will not be sustained.” Economists, as opposed to those who make their living gambling on stocks, make no claim to being able to predict when the day of reckoning will come, much less identifying the event that will bring down the house of cards.
Some, observing the crash of the sub-prime mortgage market, say, “Don’t worry, it is only a problem in the real estate sector.” But this overlooks the key role that the housing sector has played in the US economy recently, with direct investment in real estate and money taken out of houses through refinancing mortgages accounting for two-thirds to three-quarters of growth over the last six years.
Booming home prices gave Americans the confidence, and the financial wherewithal, to spend more than their income. America’s household savings rate was at levels not seen since the Great Depression, either negative or zero.
With higher interest rates depressing housing prices, the game is over. As America moves to, say, a 4% savings rate (still small by normal standards), aggregate demand will weaken, and with it, the economy.
Record-low interest rates in 2001, 2002 and 2003 did not lead Americans to invest more – there was already excess capacity. Instead, easy money stimulated the economy by inducing households to refinance their mortgages, and to spend some of their capital.
But this is what Alan Greenspan encouraged Americans to do. When normal mortgages did not prime the pump enough, he encouraged them to take out variable-rate mortgages – at a time when interest rates had nowhere to go but up.
Predatory lenders went further, offering negative amortization loans, so the amount owed went up year after year. Sometime in the future, payments would rise, but borrowers were told, again, not to worry: house prices would rise faster, making it easy to refinance with another negative amortization loan.
America managed to pass off bad mortgages worth hundreds of billions of dollars to investors (including banks) around the world. They buried the bad mortgages in complicated instruments, buried them so deep that no one knew exactly how badly they were impaired, and no one could calculate how to re-price them quickly.
Those in financial markets who believe in free markets have temporarily abandoned their faith. For the greater good of all (of course, it is never for their own selfish interests), they argued a bailout was necessary.
But lower short-term interest rates have led to higher medium-term interest rates, which are more relevant for the mortgage market, perhaps because of increasing worries about inflationary pressures. It may make sense for central banks (or Fannie Mae, America’s major government-sponsored mortgage company) to buy mortgage-backed securities in order to help provide market liquidity.
Securitization, with all of its advantages in sharing risk, has three problems that were not adequately anticipated. While it meant that American banks were not hit as hard as they would otherwise, America’s bad lending practices have had global effects.
Moreover, securitization contributed to bad lending: in the old days, banks that originated bad loans bore the consequences; in the new world of securitization, the originators could pass the loans onto others. (As economists would say, problems of asymmetric information have increased.)
In the old days, when borrowers found it impossible to make their payments, mortgages would be restructured; foreclosures were bad for both the borrower and the lender. Securitization made debt restructuring difficult, if not impossible.
With mortgages amounting to 95% or more of the value of the house, debt restructuring will not be easy. What is required is to give individuals with excessive indebtedness an expedited way to a fresh start – for example, a special bankruptcy provision allowing them to recover, say, 75% of the equity they originally put into the house, with the lenders bearing the cost.
There are many lessons for America, and the rest of the world; but among them is the need for greater financial sector regulation, especially better protection against predatory lending, and more transparency.
America’s Interest-Rate Puzzle
A great puzzle in today’s world economy is the continued low level of long-term real interest rates in the United States. Conventional macroeconomists like me look at America’s current-account deficit, now running at 7% of GDP, and know that such vast deficits are inevitably followed by large currency depreciations.
If it falls 40% against the yen sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be four percentage points higher than Japanese rates. If it falls 60% against China’s currency, the yuan, sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be six percentage points higher than Chinese rates.
The puzzle is not only that long-term rates are too low when viewed in the international context, but also that they are too low when viewed in America’s domestic context. The Bush administration continues to have no plans to sew up the veins it has opened with its medieval economic policy, which holds that bleeding revenue from the government cures all economic problems.
This means that unless America’s domestic savings rate rises mightily – which it shows no signs of doing – and unless investment expenditure remains abnormally low for the rest of this decade, the supply of loanable funds to finance investment will soon be much less than demand when the current-account deficit narrows to sustainable levels. But when supply is less than demand, prices rise sharply.
In this case, the price of loanable funds is the real interest rate. An expectation that interest rates will be high sometime in the next decade should mean high interest rates on long-term bonds today.
Yet financial markets are not pricing dollar depreciation and a rise in long-term US interest rates accordingly. When we macroeconomists talk to our friends on Wall Street, we find that they don’t view this as a puzzle at all.
On the contrary, they are puzzled about why we view the current low level of US long-term interest rates as worrisome. From their perspective, today’s high demand for long-term dollar-denominated securities is easily explained: Asian central banks are buying in order to hold down their currencies, the US Treasury is borrowing short (and thus not issuing that many long-term securities), and US companies are not undertaking the kinds of investments that would lead them to issue many long-term bonds.
But for every market mispricing there is a profit opportunity: if long-term interest rates are, indeed, too low and long-term bond prices too high, investors will short long-term US bonds, park the money elsewhere, wait for bond prices to return to fundamentals, and then cover their short positions. By doing so, they will push prices close to fundamentals today.
Wall Streeters, however, offer a counterargument: for any financial institution to, say, bet on the decline of the dollar against the yuan over the next five years in a serious, leveraged way is to put its survival at risk should the trades go wrong. And trades do go wrong: remember the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management.
The existence of large financial-market actors that do not care about maximizing their profits magnifies the riskiness of the bets. If, say, the Bank of China and the Federal Reserve decided to teach speculators a lesson by pushing the dollar’s value relative to the yuan up by 20% for a month, they could do so, bankrupting many financial institutions with short positions.
Similarly, any financial institution that bets on a sharp rise in long-term interest rates over the next five years in a serious, leveraged way also puts its survival at risk. For where should they park their money?
Real estate rental yields and stock-market payouts are low, and real estate and stock prices may well fall as much as or more than bond prices if interest rates spike. Only businesses that can borrow long-term now, lock in a low real interest rate, and invest in expanding their capacity can make the domestic bet that interest rates will rise.
But we are not careful enough to distinguish situations in which equilibrium-restoring forces are strong from those in which such forces are weak. The dollar will fall and US long-term interest rates will rise, but only when traders on Wall Street and elsewhere decide that holding dollars and long-term US bonds is more risky in the short run.
America’s Islamist Allies of Convenience
