The first two arrows of Abenomics were aimed at stimulating demand – and they were extremely effective. The consumption-tax hike was needed to sustain them in flight.
Soon, it will begin to taper off, and industrial output will approach full capacity. When demand begins to exceed supply, demand-side stimulus policies will become increasingly ineffective, and it will be time to launch the third arrow of Abenomics: growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Such reforms are essential to raise productivity growth and improve the Japanese economy’s competitiveness. Four imperatives stand out.
The first task should be to eliminate – or, at least, reduce – the thicket of government regulations that is stifling economic dynamism. The current system is so convoluted and complex that it took more than three decades to open a new medical school in Tokyo.
Furthermore, Japan’s government should push to complete negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is currently being negotiated among 12 countries, from Mexico to the United States to Vietnam. The TPP would improve Japan’s trade prospects considerably, including in sensitive sectors like agriculture, where exports of fast-moving consumer goods like flowers and vegetables would benefit.
In the absence of large-scale immigration, to which Japanese remain unamenable, one relatively simple solution would be to integrate more women into the labor force. A 10% increase in Japan’s female labor-force participation rate – an entirely attainable goal – would translate into an almost 5% gain in total labor-force participation.
Finally, Abe’s government must reduce the corporate-tax rate to align it more closely with international standards. Amid increasingly intense international competition to attract foreign investment, reducing the corporate tax would actually increase Japan’s tax revenues, by spurring companies to invest their vast cash stockpiles in more productive activities.
Now that Abe’s government has a renewed mandate from Japanese voters, it must deliver on its promises – and that means decisive and comprehensive implementation of structural reforms. Of course, this will require some sacrifices.
The next step is for Abe’s government to use its political capital to overcome vested interests, both in the bureaucracy and the business community. This means compelling businesses to give up some of the special tax benefits they now enjoy.
If all of these groups join the Japanese public in accepting reasonable sacrifices, Abe’s government can fulfill its promise and build a thriving economy. For the sake of all Japanese – not to mention a world economy in need of a new source of dynamism – that promise deserves to be met.
