When it comes to analyzing what ails Africa, it is customary to dwell at length on the continent’s traumatic past. But it strains the imagination to link Africa’s colonial-era pains with the willingness of African leaders to spend a fortune to equip their countries with state-of-the-art settlement systems, and then proceed to exclude their citizens from using them.
Abraham Lincoln once said that a house divided cannot stand. There is an economic corollary to this: an economic house divided cannot prosper.
Africa’s Hard Black Gold
To consumers in industrialized countries, uninterrupted power supply is a given. Not so in much of Africa, which experiences some of the world’s greatest power deficits, and where only two in ten people have access to electricity.
According to the International Monetary Fund’s most recent Regional Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa , in 2007 alone, nearly two-thirds of the countries in the region experienced an acute energy crisis marked by frequent and extended electricity outages.
Furthermore, they are prone to frequent drought, which reduces their output significantly, leaving many as little more than decorative infrastructure landmarks. Increasingly burgeoning populations in countries like Nigeria and Ghana imply a greater extraction of water resources for power generation.
Other resources like fuel oil, diesel, light crude, solar, and gas are also available as means of electricity generation, but their costs are all quite prohibitive.
These factors make a good argument for coal as a cheap alternative source of Africa's power. Coal has historically played a crucial role as a source of energy worldwide, and has several important advantages over other fossil fuels. First is its relative abundance.
Worldwide energy demand has increased by more than 50% since 1980, and is expected to grow annually by 1.6% between now and 2030. More than 70% of this new demand will come from developing countries, with fossil fuels projected to account for about 80% of total energy demand by the end of this period.
Much of the future increases in coal-fired electricity generation will come from strategically important developing countries like China and India. In 2006 alone, China added about 93,000 megawatts of coal- fired electricity generating capacity, and this trend is expected to continue as the country tries to meet its huge energy needs.
