Denmark, which houses some of the most efficient coal-fired power plants in the world, equally relies on coal for half of its electricity production. The same is true for Germany, which is home to some of the most efficient pulverized coal combustion units in Europe.
Against this picture then, it is hard not to expect developing countries to exploit their abundant coal resources to generate power for their own development, especially given that modern technology can help produce coal cleanly.
Some argue that gas might be a better alternative to hydro or coal, but for countries that must import much of their gas the benefits of a stable and reliable source of cheap fuel in the form of coal present a very strong counter-argument to the capital costs of a gas plant. Unlike prices for coal, which is abundant and dispersed geographically, gas prices are subject to significant volatility, and the long-term trend in the face of fossil fuel depletion is uncertain.
Moreover, the use of wood by Africa’s growing population is causing increasingly rapid deforestation in many countries. There is significant potential domestic demand for coal briquettes to replace wood for cooking and domestic and industrial heating.
Clearly, there are environmental drawbacks from the use of coal as an energy resource, and these concerns are far too important to overlook. The massive reserves notwithstanding, coal is still a finite resource.
Fueled by research, the past few years have witnessed the development of increasingly cleaner and more energy-efficient coal-fired generation plants and the retirement of older technologies, especially in the developed world. Developing countries have lagged behind in this process, but, with the common threat of global warming, there is now growing pressure to adopt conservation policies.
They must use coal to advance their economic development. Failure to do so would be a missed opportunity at a time when African countries must avail themselves of all available resources for poverty reduction.
Africa’s Immunity
Once high-flying small economies like Ireland, Hungary, and Iceland break down. Even robust China and India are experiencing slower growth, curtailed ambitions, and broken dreams.
Yet, in sub-Saharan Africa, there are few hints of the global financial crisis that is consuming the capitalist world.
