A typical Western-style house in Kampala or Accra, for example, now costs an astonishing two to three times the price of a comparable home in, say, Cleveland or other cities in the American heartland. While home prices are crashing from Madrid to Dublin and Miami to Los Angeles, African prices remain near or at record-high levels.
African banks, meanwhile, are rock-solid compared to their debt-heavy counterparts in the US and Europe. While international bankers went bust by making legions of bad loans, African bankers stuck to earning profits the old-fashioned way: paying very little to depositors, and earning a big “spread” by buying guaranteed government debt, which yielded healthy returns.
Even government deficit spending – long the bane of Africa – seems positively puny compared to the massive debts that the US and some European countries face. The new Obama administration is proposing spending plans that would create a record US deficit of more than one trillion dollars – and this coming on top of the outgoing Bush administration’s record deficit.
And yet there are good reasons to believe that it is just a matter of time before Africa and its peoples experience the ill effects of the global crisis. From Ghana to Kenya, governments are having increased difficulty in raising money for infrastructure projects and selling official debt.
Foreign investment in sub-Saharan Africa, which reached record levels in recent years, is retreating, which is evidence of investor caution, not any underlying lack of optimism about the region. And exports of raw materials to China, India, Europe, and the US – a key factor in Africa’s recent growth surge – may suffer simply because the global slowdown means less consumption everywhere.
Popular equity investments, such as shares in Safaricom, are already trading at unexpectedly low levels. If real estate prices were to fall dramatically, a chain reaction could occur, taking down big and small investors alike, and over time causing wide suffering to ordinary Africans.
Even assuming stability in real estate prices, the global crisis surely will cause a fall in remittances by Africans working good jobs in Europe, the US, Canada, Australia, and the Middle East.
Remittances are already believed to be falling, which makes sense: immigrants in rich countries are and will be disproportionately hurt by slowing economic activity. Immigration itself may even slow dramatically, depending on the length and depth of the economic slowdown.
He is also willing – and able – to pay more than a local doctor for services and, of course, a home in Uganda. Fewer remittances flowing into Uganda could mean less economic activity – or simply lower prices.
President Barack Obama, acting as if the latter scenario remains likely, is betting on large-scale government spending to prop up the real economy. If his administration succeeds, the chances that Africa will remain relatively unscathed will grow.
