While the regulatory mechanisms of both Kyoto and the European Trading Scheme have contributed to the establishment of an emerging market for carbon trading, interested parties are now concerned about the immediate future. Without a regulatory framework beyond 2012, the window of opportunity for initiating project-based transactions will close by 2006/2007.
Given the long lead time between project preparation and the first benefits of emissions reductions, project developers have only a few years to act before carbon payments cease to make a meaningful contribution to project finance in the current context. Developing infrastructure projects is a long process that requires 3-7 years from identification, through licensing, financing, and construction, and finally to the first certification of carbon emission reductions.
The World Bank has been instrumental in advancing carbon finance as a viable development tool, and in facilitating private-sector participation in the market. The Bank is focused on representing the interests of its borrowing countries, helping them to develop assets for carbon trading according to their own priorities.
But, without a commitment by governments to limit greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2012, the carbon market will remain uncertain, and the private sector – vital to the market’s success – is unlikely to expand its participation in a meaningful and sustained way. According to a recent World Bank-supported survey of companies interested in carbon finance, only one in five respondents declared that they were interested in buying post-2012 emissions reductions.
Now is the chance to look forward and enlist the global community – with no exclusions, although with differentiated responsibilities – in the pursuit of a more secure world, one that avoids the dire risks of environmental degradation and social conflict implied by inaction.
Selepas Serangan di Paris
Alasan mengapa ISIS memutuskan untuk melakukan serangannya sekarang masih berupa dugaan; barangkali ISIS memperluas terornya ke tingkat global untuk mengimbangi kehilangan wilayah mereka di Irak. Tetapi, apapun alasannya, wajib bagi kita untuk memberi respon jelas.
Sebetulnya, tantangan yang ditimbulkan ISIS justru menjadi seruan bagi kita untuk menerapkan beberapa tindakan, sebab tidak ada kebijakan tunggal yang memadai. Berbagai upaya perlu diterapkan di berbagai bidang.
Serangan udara yang lebih kuat untuk melemahkan aset-aset militer, fasilitas minyak dan gas, dan para pemimpin ISIS sangat penting. Meskipun demikian, serangan udara saja tidak akan cukup.
Sayangnya, kita tidak punya cukup waktu untuk membangun kekuatan gabungan di darat dari nol. Upaya ini sudah dicoba namun gagal, dan negara-negara Arab tidak mampu atau tidak mau membentuk armadanya.
