The social changes now underway threaten their way of life, which includes discrimination against women and a ban on modern education. But only profound reforms of traditional authority can pave the way towards freedom and growth.
Israel can serve as an example to others striving to reach economic prosperity and social freedom, because its success is due to the fact that the country had absolutely nothing at the start. We returned to our homeland, rich with history, but devoid of natural resources.
We will gladly offer a helping hand to whoever is willing to reach for it. Together, in peace with our neighbors, we can create a region of hope, development, and success.
We are sincerely interested in the establishment of a Palestinian state living peacefully side-by-side with Israel, the democratic state of the Jewish people. For us, peace is both a moral imperative and a national-security strategy, because resolving the conflict would help to stabilize the region by neutralizing the extremists who seek to manipulate today’s popular movements to advance their radical agenda.
In particular, Iran is a fount of moral corruption that spearheads extremism and halts reform, crushing the legitimate protest of its own citizens and acting against the brave Syrians now fighting for their freedom. Iran also uses proxies to instigate terror against moderate forces in the Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, and Iraq.
Iran is a danger to the peace and stability of the entire world. The world’s democracies have declared that they will not allow Iran to possess nuclear arms; it is their duty to follow through on that commitment, before doing so becomes impossible.
Beyond the short-term challenges ahead, we all have a duty to profoundly change the way we prepare our children to cope with today’s new world. In an era where yesterday has become almost irrelevant and we can hardly predict tomorrow, the role of education must allow all children to reach their highest potential.
I write this in the 88th year of my life, but not because I have learned from experience. On the contrary, experience is overrated, often constraining the courage needed to face tomorrow and build an unprecedented new world.
Against Simplification
NEW YORK – It is said that Americans have a genius for simplification. Gradually, however, the quest for it has become a global trend, one that continues to conquer new territories, just as blue jeans once did.
