To be sure, economic performance will vary widely among EU countries. While Italy will be the laggard, with only 1.1% growth, the Irish rocket will not lose its force, pushing real GDP up by about 4.8%.
But even Germany, Europe’s biggest economy, is experiencing an upswing. The Ifo climate indicator for Germany, based on monthly surveys of 7,000 firms, jumped upwards in the second half of 2005, reaching its highest value since the boom year 2000, with businesses’ assessment of the current situation and expectations improving.
The driving force is external demand, as Germany, the world’s second-largest exporter, profits from the global boom. Exports increased by 6.2% in 2005 and are expected to increase by 7.4% in 2006.
While the second half of 2005 was already quite good, Ifo expects investment in equipment to grow by a healthy 6% in 2006. After many years of contraction, investment in construction also will rise slightly.
Moreover, any investment growth is vital for Germany, which, according to the latest OECD statistics, currently suffers from the world’s lowest share of net investment in national income. Even if Germany remains the world’s laggard, rising investment demand as such will contribute to GDP growth, which Ifo estimates at 1.7% in 2006.
But everything is relative: Germany’s trend growth rate is just 1.1%, and the country has been the slowest growing EU country since 1995. Measured against a disappointing past, even Germany is currently experiencing an economic boom.
The good economic data will reinforce initial favorable impressions of Angela Merkel’s new government, which got off to an excellent start at the EU Summit, where Merkel helped to broker a compromise between Britain and France on the Union’s 2007-2013 budget (by adding another €2 billion to Germany’s annual contribution).
In fact, the government may even have contributed a bit to the good economic data by announcing a serious effort to consolidate Germany’s own public finances – a prerequisite for investor confidence. According to the government, substantial tax increases will bring the fiscal deficit below the 3%-of-GDP limit set by the Stability and Growth Pact – a target missed for five consecutive years – by 2007.
Most observers now agree that Germany needs something like the American earned-income tax credit. In Germany, it’s called “activating social aid” or “combi wages,” but the principle is the same: the state should reduce the money it pays for doing nothing and pay more for participating in the work force.
If this is more than lip service, and if she really carries out a serious reform of the German welfare state’s incentive structure, the result could be higher employment and structural economic growth. In the long term, that would be more promising for the EU – and for the global economy – than the demand-driven performance that Germany is currently enjoying.
