He thought that his old reality-based friends from the Ford administration were back in power. He thought that he – and Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill – could win the quiet “inside game” for sensible policy without resorting to an “outside game” that would make his reappointment in 2004 unlikely.
In my view, they are misdemeanors. Against them you have to set what former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers calls Greenspan’s “golden glove” performance at avoiding and minimizing recessions during his years at the Fed.
The “felonies” of which Greenspan stands accused are the other two charges: that he should have done more to stop the stock market bubble of the late 1990’s, and that he should have done more to stop the housing bubble of the early 2000’s. Here, Greenspan holds his ground, and pleads not guilty.
The only way, he says, for the Fed to have kept stock prices in reasonable equilibrium ranges in the late 1990’s would have been to raise interest rates so high that they hit the real economy on the head with a brick. Interest rates high enough to curb stock market speculation would also have curbed construction and other forms of investment, raised unemployment, and sent the economy into recession.
Higher interest rates to reduce the housing boom seem, even in retrospect, ill advised if the cost is mass unemployment. And Greenspan eschews paternalism: he would not assume the role of a regulator telling people that they cannot buy a house even though a lender is willing to finance it.
But Greenspan would have served the country and the world better if he had been somewhat more paternalist in slowing the growth of non-standard adjustable-rate mortgages. He would have served the country and the world better had he been less of a loyal Republican working the inside game of trying to convince Bush’s political advisors that good policy was important, and more of a nonpartisan steward of America’s long-term fiscal stability.
All in all, Greenspan served the United States and the world well through his stewardship of monetary policy, especially by what he did not do: trying to stop stock and housing speculation by halting the economy in its tracks.
A Lasting Poison
NEW YORK – Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of the collapse of communism in Europe. Liberated from the complexity of knowing too much about the cruel past, the young people of Eastern Europe’s post-communist generation seem uninterested in what their parents and grandparents endured.
Yet the recent revelation of the Czech writer Milan Kundera’s presumed complicity in the face of Stalinism is but the latest of the long half-life of a toxic past. Other examples come to mind: the accusations of collaboration with the secret police raised against Lech Walesa, Romania’s public controversies surrounding Mircea Eliade’s fascist past, and the attacks on the alleged “Jewish monopoly of suffering” which equate the Holocaust with the Soviet Gulag.
