In retrospect, three successive British prime ministers – Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, and David Cameron – were on overly familiar terms with a manipulative business leader. Cameron now talks about the need for “a healthier relationship between politicians and media owners.”
When he appeared before the British parliament in July, Rupert Murdoch looked like an old man, remote and out of control. In old-style family firms, there is a clear rule of succession that the oldest son takes over.
Such succession disputes become even more acute when there are multiple marriages and multiple sets of competing children. Until the eruption of the current scandal, the youngest of Murdoch’s three children from his second marriage, James, was generally believed to stand the greatest chance of succeeding his father.
The complexities of modern marriage patterns make family life much more fraught, especially when phenomenal power and huge sums of money are involved. All three of Murdoch’s marriages have produced children, though those from his current relationship are too young to be considered potential corporate successors.
Rebekah Brooks, the editor of The News of the World at the beginning of the phone-hacking scandal, and subsequently the chief executive of News International, Murdoch’s British subsidiary, played precisely such a role. The disintegration of the business empire is then accompanied and amplified by bitter disputes between the children and the substitute children.
Indeed, the crisis of the Murdoch family’s business empire is neither unique nor unprecedented. In the first half of the 1990’s, many observers of the alleged Asian economic miracle emphasized trust and families’ capacity to cooperate with political authorities in order to realize long-term growth plans.
The Arab Spring has been in large part a movement against corrupt family capitalism, embodied not only in ruling families like the Ben Alis, the Mubaraks, and the Assads, but also in the large family business empires that depended on and supported them.
But globalization also increases the chances of backlashes that focus on the vulnerabilities, weaknesses, and mistakes of big family firms. They are vulnerable to an Arab Spring (and a British summer) – and maybe to a US autumn that will focus not just on the Murdochs’ business, but also on its interplay with politics.
All Man’s Land
NEW DELHI – Ernest Hemingway’s collection of stories, Men without Women, examines tense gender relationships. In a particularly poignant story, a young man convinces his partner to have an abortion, viewing their unborn child as a hindrance to the status quo.
