The regime will also propose a “national contract,” supposedly to initiate a dialogue with the opposition. But, in the wake of Bouteflika’s bogus victory, the opposition can no longer accept a sham role in the regime’s reform plans.
In fact, the announcement that Bouteflika planned to run was enough to unite Islamists and leftists – even parties that had previously been co-opted by the regime – and spur them to stage a boycott of the vote. When the election results were announced, they swiftly rejected the new government as illegitimate.
But, to gain credibility, the opposition parties will have to extend their criticism beyond Bouteflika to the system as a whole. This has become crucial to their survival, as younger opponents are seeking new ways to bring about political change outside state-controlled politics.
Non-violent movements have formed to protest not only Bouteflika’s continued leadership, but also the pervasive role of the army and intelligence services in civil society. Such movements, like the much-publicized “Barakat” (“Enough”), have encouraged a shift among Algerians from resentful abstention to active boycott.
Moreover, young people have assumed a prominent role in opposition efforts, such as by disrupting Bouteflika’s campaign rallies. Demonstrations by unemployed young people in southern Algeria, the center of the oil industry, drew a direct link between high unemployment and the military’s control of the country’s natural resources.
By organizing peaceful protests to demand accountability for public spending, these movements are raising issues that were not addressed during the election campaign. More immediately, they are also challenging the government’s ban on street demonstrations – a vestige of the state of emergency that lasted from 1992 until 2011.
But it is becoming increasingly easy to rouse their sympathy for their fellow citizens through Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook. By stimulating daily public debate about local human-rights violations, they spread the message of discontent more efficiently than traditional parties ever have.
By demanding better state services, rather than an “Arab Spring,” Algerians have walked a fine line, highlighting the regime’s inability to deliver security and economic prosperity, despite its efforts to stifle all debate. Thus, even without explicitly talking about politics, ordinary Algerians are mobilizing in growing numbers against the government.
The majority of street protests have occurred in the most deprived and neglected areas, and the primary demands have been economic: better jobs, housing, health-care services, and infrastructure. For some, the right to make a living through the informal market would be sufficient.
And demonstrators have gone to great – sometimes destructive – lengths to be heard, blocking roads, occupying factories and government buildings, and sabotaging water and electricity infrastructure. More than 150 Algerians have even set themselves on fire since 2011, usually in front of public services buildings.
