In fact, having countries like Russia and China more vested in the well-being of the US economy would not be a bad thing. Yes, the IMF ought to develop a voluntary code of conduct for SWF’s, but it should not be used as a weapon to enforce financial protectionism.
The US economy is in trouble, and the problems it spins off are unlikely to stop at the US border. Experts from emerging markets and elsewhere have much to say about dealing with financial crises.
Alliances for Peace
WASHINGTON, DC – I grew up in the shadow of World War II, and at the dawn of the Cold War.
My father’s work as a Foreign Service officer gave me an opportunity to see history up close in a searing way: I will never forget walking the beaches of Normandy with him and seeing the burned hulks of Higgins’ boats still on those shores, just a few years after so many young men went to their graves so the world could be free. Likewise, I will never forget the eerie feeling of riding my bike through the Brandenburg Gate from West Berlin into the East, and seeing the contrast between people who were free and those who were trapped behind the Iron Curtain.
The United States and our partners worked to create alliances that brought prosperity and stability to Western Europe, Japan, and South Korea. Old enemies became new allies, and together pioneered a new global economic system that made the world more prosperous.
In short, by building effective and indispensable international institutions and strategic partnerships, we did not just avoid another catastrophic world war; we ultimately ended the Cold War and lifted global living standards for hundreds of millions of people.
That is the remarkable story of the twentieth century. The question now is what story will emerge from the twenty-first century.
Extremists who hijack religion threaten governments and people everywhere. Technology is accelerating a shift in the balance of power between governments and governed that offers both opportunities for democratic accountability and obstacles to inclusive politics.
Statecraft has yet to adapt. The international institutions and partnerships that emerged in the postwar years demand both maintenance and modernization.
