They argued it again 25 years ago, after the fall of the Berlin Wall. They were wrong then – and they are wrong now.
The need for leadership has never been greater, and the US has never been more engaged with the world. Our role in Afghanistan’s first-ever peaceful, democratic transition reminds us all that, having invested so much blood and treasure in helping to give Afghans a chance to succeed in battle, the world has just as much responsibility to help its leaders succeed in governance.
We know that the destruction of 100% of Syria’s declared chemical weapons would not have happened without direct, hands-on diplomacy and perseverance, just as Syria’s immoral and horrifying civil war will not end without an equal commitment. So, too, in Asia, where President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping just announced ambitious commitments to tackle climate change, we are reminded of what countries can accomplish together with real leadership – and of how much additional leadership is required to conclude a successful climate agreement in Paris next year.
The world has changed, and we are changing with it. Lines on the map no longer contain the gravest threats, and the players are no longer divided neatly into two camps.
No country can solve the existential threat of climate change alone. No country can eradicate extreme poverty, combat potential pandemics, or improve nuclear security by itself.
None of us can live safer, richer lives by turning our back to the world. We must build on our history of working with allies by forming new coalitions – with governments, with civil society, and, yes, with everyday people.
Political, humanitarian, and intelligence tools from more than 60 countries are being used to support unified military action. Success depends not on what one or even a handful of countries can do alone, but on what all of us are able to achieve by moving forward together against this common threat.
On an equally important front, the US is working with the United Nations to galvanize a global response to the danger posed by the Ebola virus. I have personally talked with more than 50 foreign leaders, and we all agree that only by coordinating our actions can we stop the devastation in West Africa and halt Ebola’s spread.
It demands intense diplomatic engagement and calls upon relationships that have been built and maintained over decades, as well as alliances with new partners. But by overcoming differences and coordinating efforts to defeat the Islamic State and conquer Ebola, we are reinforcing support for a world order grounded in collective solutions to common problems.
Frustration cannot grow faster than opportunity in any country. For example, the negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) reflect President Obama’s determination to strike an accord with countries that represent one-third of global trade and 40% of global GDP.
