Viewed from the standpoint of food security and the wealth of rural areas, there is now an urgent need to revisit the CAP’s main instruments so that a new policy formula can be introduced. Perverse subsidies must be removed and recent new ones favoring products such as bio-fuels reconsidered.
The
A side benefit for the EU’s standing in the world could be that the World Trade Organization’s stalled Doha negotiations could be restarted once farmers in developing countries are assured of getting a fair deal from Europe. Moreover, the CAP’s role as a motor of political and social integration in Europe could be restored once renewed policies are in place.
But renewal of this sort cannot be left to global market forces, as the results might not necessarily benefit European agriculture and society. If the market “misbehaves,” farmers could be reduced to poverty, leading to the neglect of large areas of Europe.
Such a policy has been successful in the Netherlands, substantially contributing to the development and power of the country’s agribusiness. Ten of 21 branches of Dutch agribusiness, including horticultural seeds, ornamentals, seed potatoes, and veal, are among the top contributors to the national economy and the country’s trade balance.
Many structural improvement programs have been financed at the European level, but agricultural production and land use are not among them. The development of an Agricultural Main Structure would compliment the European Ecological Main Structure.
Consumption patterns and preferences are an integral part of such systems. Preliminary studies by the European Science Foundation’s “Forward Look on European Food Systems” could prove useful in devising an EU-wide policy.
Metropolitan agriculture in a rapidly urbanizing world can provide high-quality produce on small amounts of land. It offers an answer to rising demand for healthy food with minimal environmental side effects.
But a cultural heritage should not be maintained everywhere, nor should it ignore cost. And it should not be a defensive policy of the sort that tends to concentrate on poor-quality land.
These five pillars involve drastic choices, but they will probably require less money from Europe’s taxpayers, not more. They could make a real contribution to cleaner, more productive, and efficient farming and land use, while addressing social needs.
