But the negative impact of an obstructionist, highly partisan US Congress should not be underestimated. For example, by blocking reforms to International Monetary Fund governance that were agreed in 2010, Congress has damaged, perhaps irreparably, the legitimacy and relevance of the Bretton Woods institutions.
Likewise, by refusing to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the US Congress has undermined America’s credibility as it attempts to reaffirm international law in the South China Sea, where China is acting with increasing audacity. And, by opposing the inclusion of legally binding climate commitments, it weakened the global climate agreement that was reached this month in Paris, leaving compliance and implementation uncertain.
It offers an opportunity for a fresh start, a new approach that produces the type of policy actions that the world needs. The key is engagement – among branches of the US government, between the US government and the public, and between the US and the rest of the world.
For starters, to avoid the kind of obstructionism that prevailed in the last eight years, the next president must engage Congress directly and actively. And, in fact, two of the Obama administration’s recent wins – the passage of so-called trade promotion authority (fast-track negotiating authority to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership) and the reauthorization of the small but vital Export-Import Bank – were the result of dedicated outreach, education, and, yes, cajoling of lawmakers.
The Iran nuclear agreement, one of Obama’s hallmark achievements, involved similar efforts to engage Congress, from protracted trips to Capitol Hill by Obama administration officials to a creative approach that allowed legislators to display their displeasure for the deal, without blocking its progress. Even in America’s highly divisive political atmosphere, it seems, where there is a will, there is a way.
America’s next president must also improve engagement with citizens, whose widespread disaffection constrains – or allows – US leaders to pursue a weak foreign policy. Like many Europeans today, most Americans do not seem to understand – or care to understand – that the crumbling of the liberal world order would have dire consequences for all of them.
Immediately after World War II, the memory of war, together with the enduring threat posed by the Soviet Union, made plain the importance of building and maintaining a liberal world order. Today, though the need for such an order is just as great, the argument is not nearly as comprehensible or emotionally powerful.
And make no mistake: Such engagement is indispensable. While the US must play an integral role in addressing global challenges, from ending the Syrian civil war to following through on the promises of the Paris climate agreement, it cannot do it alone.
In the second half of the twentieth century, the US showed that committed leadership could help to ensure widespread stability and prosperity. In the twenty-first century, it has showed how devastating a lack of such leadership can be.
American Pie in the Sky
