For now, EU governments’ coordinated fiscal stimulus has deprived populists of their usual charge that the EU is indifferent to the fate of individuals. Even more policy coordination will be needed both to confront the crisis and to re-establish EU norms once the storm clouds begin to dissipate.
Although it is right that the Stability and Growth Pact has become more flexible in these extraordinary times, its rules did secure a successful first decade for the euro. These rules must eventually be restored intact if Europe is to return to the path of sustainable growth, and a consensus will need to be forged now to make that happen.
A new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) between the EU and the Russian Federation must be negotiated. Those negotiations should have begun seriously last year, but the war in Georgia intervened to put them on hold.
Russia’s economy is now in far worse shape than that of EU members. The collapse of world oil and gas prices has wounded Russia’s budget, and lack of investment in the country’s energy sector over the years is now causing the declining production that economists have long predicted.
Until now, Russia has cared less about a new PCA than the EU, because two-thirds of Russia’s exports to the Union comprise natural resources, which bring in cash even without the strong rules that a PCA provides. Given the stark changes in economic conditions, however, it is now in Russia’s national interest to reassure international markets that it is a reliable place to do business, for which a new PCA would serve as an ideal signal.
Moreover, without a new PCA, individual European countries may feel it necessary to seek even more bilateral agreements with Russia. Indeed, many EU members have been in a race with each other to see who will be Russia’s closest friend in the Union.
When the Georgia crisis erupted, Europe united around a single position on Russia’s withdrawal. It is the Czech Republic’s task, and that of the Swedish EU presidency that will follow our own, to maintain this unity as the PCA negotiations move forward.
During the 1990’s, the US and Europe erred in treating Russia with benign neglect. It would be a mistake for Russia to respond in kind today by seeking to prolong the PCA negotiations in the hope that a possibly more amenable EU president may one day offer softer terms. We, like all EU presidencies, will be representing the wider Union interests when we negotiate.
The Trade Delusion
Transatlantic and transpacific trade negotiations are progressing slowly, held back by the resistance of special interests. But, though many experts fear that protectionism is undermining globalization, threatening to impede global economic growth, slower growth in global trade may be inevitable, and trade liberalization is decreasingly important.
