ऐसी सरकारों को सहायता देने के फलस्वरूप, जो विशिष्ट सामाजिक समूहों का बहिष्कार करने की अनुमति देती हैं, वास्तविक आर्थिक लागत बहुत अधिक हो सकती है। नए ऋणों पर विचार करते समय यह सुनिश्चित करने के लिए क़दम उठाए जाने चाहिए कि लाभ यथासंभव समावेशी हों।
अगर विश्व बैंक - जो वर्तमान में नाइजीरिया को लगभग $5.5 अरब का ऋण दे रहा है और यह उम्मीद है कि यह अगले चार सालों में हर साल अतिरिक्त $2 अरब के लिए वचन देगा - इस दिशा में कार्रवाई करता है, तो हो सकता है कि अन्य वित्तदाता भी उसका अनुसरण करें। अफ़्रीका के LGBT लोगों को अपने मानव और आर्थिक अधिकारों के लिए संघर्ष में ऐसे शक्तिशाली सहयोगियों की सख़्त ज़रूरत है।
A Democratic Burma?
Deng Xiaoping’s economic opening followed China’s bloody – and failed – invasion of Vietnam in 1978. And South Africa’s last apartheid leader, F. W. de Klerk, was initially perceived as just another apologist for the system – hardly the man to free Nelson Mandela and oversee the end of white minority rule.
Is Burma, like South Africa under de Klerk, truly poised to emerge from a half-century of self-imposed isolation? And can Aung San Suu Kyi, the heroic opposition leader, and Thein Sein, Burma’s new president, engineer a political transition as skillfully and peacefully as Mandela and de Klerk did for South Africa in the early 1990’s?
Despite her two decades of house arrest and isolation, Suu Kyi possesses two of the gifts that enabled Mandela to carry out his great task: a reassuring serenity and an utter lack of vindictiveness. As Burma’s authorities test reform, these gifts, together with her negotiating skills and, most of all, her vast moral authority, will be tested as never before.
Moreover, unlike Mandela during his 27-year imprisonment, Suu Kyi has had her hopes raised – and dashed – before. In the mid-1990’s, and again in 2002-2003, reconciliation between Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy (NLD) and the military junta seemed to be in the offing.
Yet Suu Kyi, and much of the Burmese opposition, is beginning to admit that today’s political liberalization might be the real thing. Because Burma’s generals say almost nothing in public, it is difficult to fathom why they allowed elections that elevated Thein Sein to power, or to explain their willingness to embrace dialogue with the long-suppressed opposition.
Recent events suggest one possible explanation: Burma’s rulers have grown wary of China’s almost smothering embrace – a result of the country’s international isolation. Indeed, public protests against China’s commercial exploitation of Burma’s natural resources became so widespread that the government called a halt to construction by Chinese investors on the huge and environmentally damaging Myitsone Dam on the Irrawaddy River.
Thein Sein’s decision to halt the project is clearly an important policy shift. It is also a signal to the outside world that Burma’s new government may be much more willing than any of its predecessors to heed both public pressure and international opinion, both of which vehemently opposed the dam’s construction.
