Before the crisis, the single-minded emphasis on reducing national budget deficits to less than 3% of GDP led to extensive abuse. Either the target was openly flouted, as it was in leading economies like Germany and France, or the data were manipulated to obscure problems (a common practice throughout the eurozone, not just in Greece).
In other words, EU leaders began to complicate fiscal governance, ultimately creating an inefficient, inescapable labyrinth of regulation and bureaucracy. As fiscal metrics become increasingly intricate, monitoring efforts will become ever easier to undermine.
The case for returning fiscal responsibility to national authorities is also strong – and not only because centralized fiscal authority has proved to be so inefficient. With citizens of distressed countries bearing the fiscal burden of the crisis, the enduring presumption that they will not act responsibly is patronizing, at best.
National fiscal sovereignty would facilitate the final crucial step: building a more mature relationship with private lenders. The eurozone was founded on the “no bailout” principle: if member states could not repay their debts, lenders would bear the losses.
As a result, these countries have condemned themselves to continued austerity, low growth, and high debt, while diminishing any future incentive for private lenders to impose fiscal discipline on sovereign borrowers. Only by shifting the burden of responsibility back onto private lenders can debtor countries escape this quagmire.
The states are not regulated by the federal government; they are disciplined by the knowledge that no one will repay their debts for them. And the system seems to work: entering the crisis, US states had significantly lower deficit and debt ratios than the eurozone’s vulnerable member states.
So far, European integration has largely been a process of “falling forward,” with each stumble serving as a lesson from which a stronger union emerges. But, while this uncertain approach may suffice as a basis for declarations of good intentions, it does not inspire the confidence required for countries to make the profound financial commitment that is now needed.
Europeans should have the chance to regain their footing. Transferring fiscal responsibility back to national authorities would not only mean the end of counterproductive efforts to manage fiscal affairs centrally; it would also diminish the sense of frustration and lack of control that is fueling Euro-skepticism.
For a fiscal union to function – however unlikely that outcome may be – a solid foundation is crucial. As Gauck explained, Europeans “are pausing to… equip [themselves] both intellectually and emotionally for the next step, which will require [them] to enter uncharted territory.”
Giving Europeans the time and space to choose more Europe would reinforce the core values upon which integration has rested for more than six decades. Continuing to stumble forward, however, would inevitably lead to a debilitating, if not fatal, fall.
