It gave Greek Cypriot leaders the possibility of blocking progress in negotiations between the EU and Turkey. So how can Turkey under these conditions maintain confidence in the EU’s fairness?
Political and legal reforms in Turkey in recent years have been remarkably far-reaching, for they have clearly been spurred by Turks’ wish to move closer to the EU. But Turkish public support for EU membership has fallen dramatically as Turks have grown to feel that they are not being given a fair deal.
This has given new strength to those who want Turkey to develop in another direction, towards a more Islamic society instead of a modern secular state. Therefore, the recent lack of progress in Turkey’s reform process can to a large extent be explained by the EU’s behavior.
This leaves us with the third question: what kind of Turkey does the EU want?
There should be no doubt about the answer: it is clearly in the EU’s interest to see Turkey’s democracy and economy continue to strengthen.
But they are reacting to the current situation. When they are asked if they would like a reformed Turkey as a partner – a Turkey that lives up fully to the conditions for membership described in the Copenhagen Criteria (democracy, rule of law, respect for human rights, and an effective market economy) – many more are inclined to say yes.
First, they should say clearly to their own voters that the EU must live up to its promises to Turkey, and that this is in the larger interest of all Europeans. Second, they should give Turkey a fair deal in the negotiations.
The first litmus test on European leadership concerns the practical problem of access to harbors. Here the Finns, who chair the EU right now, have taken an initiative to implement a pragmatic solution that takes into consideration both sides in the conflict.
At the same time, a new effort should be made to bring life to the UN’s proposals regarding Cyprus. If this means putting pressure on some actors within the EU’s own ranks, so be it.
A Farewell to (Glorious) War
