Afghanistan’s Drug-Friendly Environment
Afghanistan’s President Hamid Karzai has stepped up international fundraising efforts in recent weeks, seeking a fresh package of military and reconstruction aid from the United States, together with stronger strategic guarantees. But Karzai’s relationship with his sponsors has begun to sour, in part owing to charges that his government has failed to stop the resurgence of Afghanistan’s huge opium trade.
Underlying the opium trade issue is a security threat of another kind, one overlooked since the US-led invasion toppled the Taliban regime in 2001, despite the grave risk it poses to Afghanistan’s long-term stability, and that of the region.
In countries like Afghanistan, where 80% of the population lives on what they grow and many communities live far from any water source, environmental damage can be both economically devastating and politically momentous. That lesson should have been absorbed and understood, not least by American strategists, long before the Taliban’s fall.
Sendero, which supplemented its income with drug production and timber smuggling, deliberately chose drought-weakened and deforested mountain villages as the stronghold of its insurgency. Similarly, the Maoist insurgency in Nepal, which has claimed 10,000 lives, exploits the desperation of mountain villagers hit by flash floods – the result of deforestation higher up.
No Maoist group could ever gain a toehold in Afghanistan’s parched Pashtun south (these were, after all, people who, bare-knuckled, smashed the Soviets). But the Taliban’s rapid rise in the 1990’s was inextricably linked to the failure of irrigation systems.
The Taliban are now an increasingly spent force, but lack of water reinforced the logic of opium production across its former strongholds in the south. Irrigation has failed or is inadequate in Helmand, Uruzgan, and Kandahar – three of the top five opium-producing provinces – where indebted farmers are hooked by the economics: opium brings in eight times as much cash as wheat and uses less water.
Agriculture there has been damaged by the cutting of walnut, apricot, and mulberry trees for winter fuel, and by a failure to replant poplar, willow, and tamarisk – the trees that hold fragile meadows in place. These sorts of trees can be restored, given a concerted campaign and investment in nurseries to produce local varieties.
Loss of the ancient cedar, pine, fir, and oak forests on the slopes above is another matter. This year’s snowmelt caused landslides and flooding – a warning of more soil erosion and destruction of arable land to come; hundreds died and thousands lost their livelihoods.
In 1960, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization spoke of wasteful logging practices, such as “head-skidding” (in which a log is rolled downhill, ripping up plants and soil). Aerial photographers were called in, and a large budget was set aside.
