Doctors are on strike, taxes are on the rise, the parties in government are mauling each other, and Chancellor Angela Merkel herself proclaimed in a prominent speech that the country is in disastrous shape. But the Germans, undaunted by it all, simply keep celebrating one great soccer party with their newfound friends from all over the world.
In Berlin, as in other large German cities, taxis sport the flags of their drivers’ home countries – from Angola to Saudi Arabia. Fans don not just their nations’ flags, but also fantastic costumes evocative of their home countries’ colors.
In short, Germany during the World Cup is reminiscent of a Shakespearean midsummer night’s dream, with a touch of Woodstock to boot. Outside the stadiums, public screenings of the games have become joyous mass “happenings.”
First, Europe and South America are more dominant than four years ago and remain the unchallenged great powers of international soccer. So we must hope that the World Cup in South Africa in 2010 will finally bring greater global parity.
On the French, English, and Portuguese teams, too, it is the young players that have shone – despite the continuing presence of Zidane, Beckham, and Figo. Even the Brazilian squad is looking more aggressive and likely to score with young players like Robinho and Juninho than with their aging champions from 2002.
At the top international level, soccer has become faster and more athletic, and the top teams can shrink space on the field more effectively. A team that is unable to keep going at full speed for the full 90 (or more) minutes, switch from defense to offense quickly with the whole team, and maintain control of the ball to restrict their opponents' movements won’t stand much of a chance.
Here, soccer parallels today’s globalized markets, which make similar restructuring of national economies necessary. Unlike economic globalization, however, it remains to be seen whether this new, fast-paced style of soccer will prevail (after all, the young blood of Spain lost to the Old Boys of France).
Let’s hope that when the last whistle blows at the final in Berlin on July 9, we Germans retain as much of this positive spirit as possible. Germany urgently needs this kind of optimism, because, unfortunately, two universal principles will continue to apply in the future: first, the winter will return, and, second, the ball is round and the next game is always the most difficult.
A Free Lunch for America
BERKELEY – Former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers had a good line at the International Monetary Fund meetings this year: governments, he said, are trying to treat a broken ankle when the patient is facing organ failure. Summers was criticizing Europe’s focus on the second-order issue of Greece while far graver imbalances – between the EU’s north and south, and between reckless banks’ creditors and governments that failed to regulate properly – worsen with each passing day.
