Japan, whose economic recovery is attributable largely to its deepening ties with China in recent years, is also eager to demonstrate that it regards China not as a threat but as an opportunity, as least in economic terms. It was 30 years ago that former Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, the father of today’s prime minister, signed a Peace and Friendship Treaty with China.
But, unlike three decades ago, when the Japanese regarded China as one of their most favored countries, public opinion in both countries nowadays registers more negative feelings than positive ones. Behind the smiles, the polite interactions, and the cautiously worded diplomatic language, strong undercurrents of suspicion remain.
Despite new joint projects in energy efficiency and environmental protection, areas in which China ranks Japan as the best performer among industrialized countries, the two sides remain in bitterly divided over these territorial waters, which contain huge potential oil, gas, and other mineral deposits. Even after many rounds of talks, no resolution is in sight, and Hu’s visit is not expected to produce any breakthroughs.
But Japan remains concerned about China’s rapidly modernizing military, while China worries about a potential US-Japan containment strategy for China, especially in the case of a crisis in the Taiwan Straits. So, although both sides endorse the idea of a “mutually beneficial strategic relationship,” and despite progress bilateral on military exchanges, mutual trust and confidence-building have a long way to go.
Last year, Japan’s committed investment projects in China fell 24% from 2006, while actual investment volume decreased by 25%, partly owing to regulatory changes in China regarding foreign investment. Recent food safety issues, such as the “poisoned dumplings” cases, have clearly heightened the Japanese public’s sensitivity about Chinese exports.
Finally, historical issues could still resurface to cause new problems. While Fukuda has made it clear that he will not visit the Yasukuni Shrine, 160 other parliamentarians paid homage at the site last month, an indication that conservative forces in Japan remain strong and that future prime ministers may not abstain from visiting Yasukuni.
Africa at Risk
ADDIS ABABA – Climate change will hit Africa – a continent that has contributed virtually nothing to bring it about – first and hardest.
Africa has thus contributed nothing to the historical accumulation of greenhouse gases through carbon-based industrialization. Moreover, its current contribution is also negligible, practically all of it coming from deforestation and degradation of forests and farmland.
Yet climate change will hit Africa hardest, because it will cripple the continent’s vulnerable agricultural sector, on which 70% of the population depends. All estimates of the possible impact of global warming suggest that a large part of the continent will become drier, and that the continent as a whole will experience greater climatic variability.
