Consider land-locked Ethiopia, which only ten years ago seemed to be an especially bad bet. But then the country built an industrial park near Addis Ababa and invited the Chinese shoemaker Huajian to open a factory there.
In 2013, spurred by Huajian's success, the Ethiopian government created a new industrial park, with space for 22 factory units. Within three months, all of them had been leased by export-oriented companies from Turkey, Korea, Taiwan, China, and elsewhere.
As investors learn more about Africa, they will increasingly see what it has to offer. Indeed, the cost of labor in Africa is competitive enough that Ethiopia could attract companies from countries as poor as Bangladesh.
They will establish contacts with international buyers and investors. And, eventually, some of them will be able to raise capital and start firms of their own – export companies owned and operated by Africans.
In the 1970s, the government set up industrial parks to process textiles and garments for export. At the time, most of the owners were from Taiwan or Hong Kong; today, more than 70% of the island's industrial companies are locally owned.
The international development community and many African governments want to work toward regional integration, linking the markets of 55 African countries. This might have its advantages, but it should not be a priority.
Developing countries must use their limited resources in the most effective way, and there is no question where the most attractive opportunities in Africa are to be found. For example, instead of investing heavily in the infrastructure needed for regional integration, a country like Ethiopia would be better off building industrial parks and linking them by road to ports in Djibouti.
With the right growth strategy, far-reaching change can come within a person's lifetime – sometimes more than once. My native Taiwan is now a high-income economy.
I moved to mainland China in 1979, when the country's per capita income was less than one-third of Sub-Saharan Africa's. Today, China has become an upper-middle-income country, and it is on track to become a high-income country by 2020.
My hope is that I can witness a third economic transformation in my lifetime, this time in Ethiopia and other countries in Africa. If they stay on the tried and tested path of those who have gone before, there is every chance that I will.
